KONSTANTIN PAUSTOVSKY    (1892–1968) was born in Moscow and grew up in
Ukraine, where he attended the same Kyiv high school as Mikhail
Bulgakov. His law studies at the University of Moscow were interrupted by
the outbreak of World War I and, in the years that followed, he would make
ends meet as a trolley driver, a paramedic, a factory worker, and a
fisherman. He had begun publishing stories as early as 1911 but it was not
until the 1930s that his fiction, which is often about the lives of Soviet
workers, nature, and events of Russian history, began to be noticed. During
World War II, he served as a war correspondent and in the 1950s used his
position to publish young writers as well as writers who had been
suppressed during Stalin’s regime. His best-known work is his
autobiography, The Story of a Life, a searching six-volume chronicle of a
life touched by the often bewildering events of the twentieth century. In
1965, Paustovsky was nominated for the Nobel Prize in Literature.

DOUGLAS SMITH  is a translator and historian, and has written several books
about Russian history. His book Former People: The Final Days of the
Russian Aristocracy won the inaugural Pushkin House Russian Book Prize
in 2013, was a BBC Radio 4 Book of the Week, and was chosen Book of
the Year by Andrew Solomon in Salon.

                            OceanofPDF.com
THE STORY OF A LIFE
Books 1–3

KONSTANTIN PAUSTOVSKY


Translated from the Russian by
DOUGLAS SMITH


NEW YORK REVIEW BOOKS


New York

                            OceanofPDF.com
THIS IS A NEW YORK REVIEW BOOK
PUBLISHED BY THE NEW YORK REVIEW OF BOOKS
435 Hudson Street, New York, NY 10014
www.nyrb.com

Copyright © 1945, 1946, 1955, 1957 by Konstantin Paustovsky
Translation, introduction, and notes copyright © 2022 by Douglas Smith
All rights reserved.

Book I: The Faraway Years first serialized as “Dalëkie gody: povest' o
detstve” in Russia in 1945 in Novyi mir. First published with the title
Dalëkie gody: povest' o detstve i iunosti in Russia in 1946 by
Gosudarstvennoe        izdatel'stvo   detskoi      literatury    Ministerstva
Prosveshcheniia. Book II: Restless Youth first serialized as “Bespokoinaia
iunost'” in Russia in 1955 in Novyi mir. First published with the title Povest'
o zhizni in Russia in 1955 by Sovetskii pisatel'. Book III: The Dawn of an
Uncertain Age first published as “Nachalo nevedomogo veka” (together
with Books I and II) in Vol. 3 of Sobranie sochinenii in Russia in 1957 by
Gosudarstvennoe izdatel’stvo khudozhestvennoi literatury.

First published in the United Kingdom by Vintage Classics. Vintage
Classics is part of the Penguin Random House group of companies.
First published as a New York Review Books Classic in 2023.

Cover image: Kuzma Petrov-Vodkin, Fantasia, 1925; photograph © Fine
Art Images/Bridgeman Images
Cover design: Katy Homans

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Paustovsky, Konstantin, 1892–1968, author. | Smith, Douglas,
   1962– translator.
Title: The story of a life / by Konstantin Paustovsky ; translated from the
   Russian, and with notes and an introduction by Douglas Smith.
Other titles: Povest' o zhizni. English
Description: New York: New York Review Books, [2022] | Series: New
  York Review Books classics
Subjects: LCSH: Paustovsky, Konstantin, 1892–1968. | Authors, Russian—
  20th century—Biography. | LCGFT: Autobiographies.
Identifiers: LCCN 2022018701 (print) | LCCN 2022018702 (ebook) | ISBN
  9781681377223 (paperback) | ISBN 9781681377230 (ebook)
Classification: LCC PG3476.P29 Z46 2022 (print) | LCC PG3476.P29
  (ebook) | DDC 891.73/42 [B]—dc23/eng/20220429
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2022018701
LC ebook record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2022018702

ISBN 978-1-68137-723-0
v1.0

For a complete list of titles, visit www.nyrb.com

                             OceanofPDF.com
CONTENTS


Cover
Biographical Notes
Copyright and More Information
Title Page
Introduction: Konstantin Paustovsky – Life and Work of a Forgotten Master
Russia and Central Europe, 1914
BOOK ONE. THE FARAWAY YEARS
1. The Death of My Father
2. My Grandfather Maxim Grigorievich
3. Carp
4. Pleurisy
5. A Trip to Chenstokhov
6. Pink Oleanders
7. Elderwood Balls
8. Svyatoslavskaya Street
9. Winter Scenes
10. The Midshipman
11. What Paradise Looks Like
12. The Forests of Bryansk
13. The Swarm
14. Water from the Limpopo
15. The First Commandment
16. Lime Blossoms
17. Just a Little Boy
18. The Red Lantern
19. Deserted Tauris
20. Ruin
21. Artillerymen
22. Kean, the Great Tragedian
23. On My Own
24. Diky Lane
25. Autumn Battles
26. ‘Living’ Languages
27. ‘Gentlemen Schoolboys’
28. The Hook-Nosed King
29. Wasting Time
30. The Inn on the Braginka
31. My Grandmother’s Garden
32. ‘Golden Latin’
33. Instructors of the Humanities
34. A Shot in the Theatre
35. Razgulyai Square
36. A Tale about Nothing
37. Leaving School
38. Summer Lightning
39. A Small Dose of Poison
BOOK TWO. RESTLESS YOUTH
40. ‘Here Lives Nobody’
41. An Unprecedented Autumn
42. The Copper Line
43. To One Side of the War
44. The Old Man with the Hundred-Rouble Ticket
45. Lefortovo Nights
46. Medical Orderly
47. Russia in Snow
48. Paper Scraps and the Bugler
49. Rain in the Carpathian Foothills
50. Beyond the Muddy San
51. Spring on the Vepsh
52. The Great Swindler
53. The Ocean Liner Portugal
54. Over Bombed-Out Roads
55. The Little Knight
56. Two Thousand Volumes
57. The Village of Kobrin
58. Treason
59. In the Marshy Woods
60. Under a Lucky Star
61. The Bulldog
62. A Dank Winter
63. A Grievous Commotion
64. The Suburb of Chechelevka
65. One Day
66. The Hotel Great Britain
67. Notebooks and Memory
68. The Art of Whitewashing
69. A Raw February
BOOK THREE. THE DAWN OF AN UNCERTAIN AGE
70. Whirlpool
71. Blue Torches
72. The Journalists’ Café
73. The Hall with a Fountain
74. The Zone of Silence
75. Revolt
76. Material for a History of Russian Houses
77. A Few Explanations
78. The Riga–Orël Goods Wagon
79. The Neutral Zone
80. Our Rag-Tag Hetman
81. The Violet Ray
82. The Bolshevik and the Haidamachka
83. Crimson Riding Breeches
84. Puff Pastry
85. A Cry in the Night
86. The Wedding Present
87. Firinka, Running Water and a Bit of Danger
88. The Last Shot

Note on the Translation
Guide to Place Names

                            OceanofPDF.com
INTRODUCTION
Konstantin Paustovsky: Life and Work of a Forgotten Master



In  June 1964, having just alighted from her plane in Moscow, Marlene
Dietrich was mobbed by reporters. The actress had arrived in the Soviet
Union for a concert tour, and the press was in a fever over the chance to
interview the Hollywood legend. Bombarded by questions, Dietrich replied
that there was only one thing she had to say: tell me all you know about
Konstantin Paustovsky.
   Dietrich had recently read a French translation of Paustovsky’s novella
The Telegram and could not stop thinking about it and its author. For the
next hour the reporters told her everything they knew about Paustovsky
before Dietrich finally had to end the conversation and leave for her hotel.
   On the night of the 13th, Dietrich performed for a gathering of writers,
artists and actors at Moscow’s Central House of Writers. Before going out
on stage, her interpreter came to the dressing room to tell Dietrich that
Paustovsky was in the audience. She couldn’t believe it. ‘That’s
impossible,’ she gasped, seized by an attack of nerves. She was unhappy
with her performance that night, for she overexerted herself trying to make
the best possible impression on the one man in Russia she had most wanted
to meet.
   After taking her final bow, Dietrich was instructed to wait a moment.
Before she realised what was happening, there was Paustovsky slowly
mounting the stairs onto the stage. Dietrich recalled later that she was so
overcome with emotion she was unable to speak. All she could do to
express her admiration for Paustovsky was to fall at his feet and bow her
head. Paustovsky gently took her hands in his. The hall erupted in applause.
A photographer captured the scene.
   Paustovsky started to help Dietrich back up when his doctor ran to the
stage. ‘Don’t even think of lifting her!’ he ordered. Paustovsky, now in his
early seventies, had come to the concert straight from his hospital bed
where he had been recovering from his second heart attack. The gentleman
in Paustovsky wrestled with the voice of his doctor telling him to leave
Dietrich on her knees and not strain his weak heart. He stood there for a few
awkward moments until help arrived and Dietrich was returned to her feet.
   The two spent the next several hours together talking about literature and
art. ‘He is the best Russian writer I know,’ she wrote in her memoirs. ‘I
regret that I did not meet him earlier.’ The following year Dietrich told the
BBC that if she were cast away on a desert island and could bring only one
book with her it would be Paustovsky’s The Story of a Life.1
   At the time of her visit, Paustovsky was nearing the height of his fame.
Four years later, upon his death at the age of seventy-six, he was not only
Russia’s most treasured writer of the twentieth century but, according to his
obituary in The Times, perhaps the most popular and admired living Soviet
writer in both Britain and the United States.2
   It is hard to exaggerate Paustovsky’s stature in the 1960s. Over his long
career, he wrote dozens of short stories, novels, screenplays, dramas,
fairytales and children’s books. Many of these works were made into films,
and his stories served as the inspiration for three operas and a ballet. In
1941, he wrote the script for the film Lermontov, with a score by Sergei
Prokofiev. The work that brought him the greatest fame, however, was his
epic six-part memoir, The Story of a Life, published in the Soviet Union
between 1945 and 1963. His memoir was devoured by generations of
Russians, and Paustovsky himself became the object of intense fascination
among his devoted fans. In his later years he settled in the town of Tarusa,
south of Moscow, where he would write the final volumes of his memoir in
a small hut perched on a high bluff. When word of Paustovsky’s writing
shed got out, crowds began gathering in a nearby field in the hope of
observing the master at work. Paustovsky soon found it impossible to
concentrate and had to plant a long row of trees to afford him the necessary
privacy to write.3
   But it wasn’t just the writing that so endeared Paustovsky to his fellow
Russians. It was his character as well. He was one of the few honest and
uncompromised writers of the Soviet period. He managed not to join the
Communist Party, to sign his name to any denunciation of another writer, or
to sell out his talent to curry favour with Soviet officialdom. Paustovsky
somehow found a way not only to survive the bloody horrors of twentieth-
century Russia, but to live a life of basic decency and to preserve his inner
freedom against the monstrous force of totalitarianism.

                                      •

Konstantin Georgievich Paustovsky was born in Moscow in 1892. His
father, Georgy, a descendant of Petro Konashevych-Sahaidachny, the
brilliant seventeenth-century military commander and hetman of the
Zaporozhian Cossacks, served as a statistician for the Russian railway. His
mother, Maria Grigorievna Vysochanskaya, came from an impoverished
noble family. Her father was employed at a sugar factory. Paustovsky’s
grandfather on his father’s side had been a chumak, travelling back and
forth between central Ukraine and the Black Sea with his oxcart hauling
goods to market. One of his grandmothers was a Turk, the other a Pole.
Like so many Russians, Paustovsky was a product of empire.
   In 1898, the Paustovskys – little Kostik, as he was affectionately called,
his older sister Galina (Galya), and his brothers Boris and Vadim – moved
to Kiev, where Georgy took a job with the South West Railway. In 1904,
Paustovsky was admitted to the prestigious First Kiev Gymnasium. Among
his schoolmates was Mikhail Bulgakov. The idyll that had been
Paustovsky’s childhood came to an end two years later when Georgy left
Maria for another woman. Devastated by the betrayal, the family began a
downward spiral. In 1909, Maria, no longer able to make ends meet in Kiev,
took Galya and Vadim to Moscow and sent Kostik off to live with her
brother, Nikolai Vysochansky, and his family in Bryansk. From then on,
Paustovsky began what he would call his ‘wandering life’, forever on the
move, never settling down in any one place for long.4
   The following year he managed to return to the gymnasium in Kiev by
supporting himself as a private tutor. After graduating in 1912, Paustovsky
enrolled in the Imperial Kiev University and published his first story, ‘On
the Water’, in the journal Ogni (‘Lights’). He had been writing for three
years by now – poems and short sketches – and was fully consumed by the
dream of becoming a writer.
   Two years later Paustovsky found himself back in Moscow. He had
planned to continue his studies at the university there when the First World
War began and his brother Vadim left for the front. Soon after, Boris joined
the army as well. Paustovsky quit his studies and got a job as a tram driver
to help support his mother and sister. His poor eyesight, plus the fact that he
was the youngest of three sons, two of whom were fighting in the tsar’s
army, saved him from the bloody savagery of the war. Both Vadim and
Boris were killed in action in 1915.
    By then Paustovsky was serving as an orderly on a hospital train at the
front. Wounded by a German shell, he returned to Moscow and found work
in an arms factory and began writing his first novel, The Romantics,
eventually published in 1935. It wasn’t long before he was off again – first
to Yekaterinoslav, then Yuzovka, then Taganrog, where he laboured in a
series of factories, before being taken on as a fisherman in a small village
on the Sea of Azov. By 1917, he had returned to Moscow and started
working as a newspaper reporter, which would become his main occupation
for the next decade. All the while Paustovsky continued to write. That same
year he gathered up his courage and sent a few of his poems to Ivan Bunin,
his literary idol. Amazingly, Bunin replied: ‘I think your future lies in prose,
it is here I see your true poetry. If you are able to show enough persistence,
I am certain you can achieve something significant.’5
    On a dangerous journey to reach his mother and sister, now living in the
Ukrainian countryside, Paustovsky found himself trapped in Kiev by the
raging violence of the Russian Civil War. Stranded there for a year, he
survived off piecework for a few publications before being conscripted first
into the army of Ukrainian hetman Pavlo Skoropadskyi and then a convict
regiment in the Red Army. At the first opportunity, Paustovsky escaped
Kiev for Odessa in 1919. He would remain here, making numerous
excursions around the Black Sea region and Caucasus, for the next several
years, and become part of a lively group of writers which included Isaac
Babel and Ilya Ilf.
    In 1925, Paustovsky published his first book of stories and short works –
Sea Sketches – followed by another collection, titled Oncoming Ships, two
years later. The editors of this second book refused to include one of the
stories, however, because they felt it amounted to nothing more than ‘a
romantic episode, completely devoid of social significance’.6 The
ideological criticism of his writing was to grow in the coming years.
    Paustovsky’s 1929 novel Shining Clouds was denounced by one critic as
having the potential ‘to disorganise the class consciousness of the
proletarian reader’ and was placed on a ‘blacklist’ of works to be removed
from all Soviet libraries. The Communist Party’s Central Committee
debated confiscating every copy of Shining Clouds as being, in the words of
one speaker, ‘very ideologically harmful, particularly for young readers’. In
the end, no action was taken, but Paustovsky now understood that he was
being watched. ‘Apparently, they’re going to be keeping an eye on me as a
writer. I find this business extremely stupid and typical of the times,’ he
wrote in a letter that summer.7 All this was happening as Stalin’s
‘Revolution from Above’ was getting under way. It was a dangerous time
for a writer to be suspected of ideological deviance, and as Paustovsky
would later remark, it was pure chance that he survived Stalin’s terror.8
   Out of step with the main currents of Soviet literature, Paustovsky next
wrote two novels inspired by the crash industrialisation of the First Five-
Year Plan. Kara-Bugaz (1932) took as its subject the construction of an
industrial salt extraction plant along the eastern shores of the Caspian Sea,
while in Kolkhida (1934) Paustovsky recounted the development of a
gargantuan chemical facility at Berezniki in the Ural Mountains, one of the
largest industrial projects of the time. Although both works received an
enthusiastic response, including from Maxim Gorky,9 Paustovsky chafed at
the prospect of continuing to write works in the Socialist Realist mode
(attentive readers noted that at its core Kara-Bugaz was in fact an adventure
novel) and he was growing disgusted with life in Moscow.
   Under Stalin the literary world was becoming increasingly
bureaucratised, constrained and smothered by censorship and Party control.
What Paustovsky dubbed ‘an army of hack writers’, together with talentless
timeservers and vulgar functionaries, were suffocating the last remaining
voices of truth and honesty, and he longed to leave the capital for the
provinces, to be away from this deadening milieu, off and on his own
surrounded by the beauty of the Russian countryside. Finally, in the autumn
of 1931, he quit his job with ROSTA, the Soviet press agency, and left
Moscow for the village of Solotcha near Ryazan. He wrote at the time that it
was ‘pointless’ to remain in Moscow any longer. He had at last become, in
his words, ‘a true writer [ . . . ] The time has come to speak “at the top of
my voice”.’10 When not off travelling, Paustovsky spent most of the next
decade in Solotcha writing several books inspired by Russian history and
nature, most importantly The Land of Meshchëra (1939), works that while
cherished by readers placed his oeuvre even further outside the literary
mainstream.
   With the Nazi invasion of the Soviet Union in June 1941, Paustovsky
was sent to report on the fighting near Tiraspol and Odessa. He was
embedded with Soviet forces on the front lines and experienced vicious
combat and aerial bombardments for six weeks running before being
recalled to Moscow, where he continued to write pieces on the war effort
for the Soviet press.11

                                      •

In an interview in 1959, Paustovsky said:

  Everything that I have written before [The Story of a Life] was a step
  on the way to this book, on which I continue to work even now. I
  dream of bringing it up to the current day, but fear I won’t manage.
  Only now do I realise I that started on this project much too late.12

   He began writing a still ill-defined autobiographical work in Solotcha in
May 1943. Its roots, however, went back much further. While still a
gymnasium student in Kiev he wrote a story about his experiences of a visit
to Polesia that would become the basis for ‘The Inn on the Braginka’ in The
Faraway Years. In the early 1920s, he wrote ‘The Village of Kobrin’, which
he later reworked and included in Restless Youth. Additional chapters in The
Story of a Life also started out as parts of other books.
   In October 1945, Paustovsky published ‘The Faraway Years: A Story of
Childhood’ in the journal Novyi mir (‘New World’). This included roughly
half of what would grow to become the complete first volume, which was
published in book form late the following year. At this point, Paustovsky
had no plans for continuing his memoir beyond his early youth and didn’t
return to the project for several years. The official reaction may have had
something to do with this. The Faraway Years was met coldly by Soviet
critics, and the publisher, Molodaia Gvardiia, even halted production of a
second edition of the book just as it was about to go to print after powerful
voices raised objections to the fact that ‘this book is filled with lots of
liberal kindliness and very little revolutionary wrath’.13
   Readers, however, embraced Paustovsky’s story. None more so than Ivan
Bunin. Now the leading light of the Russian émigré community in France,
Bunin, who had won the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1933, stumbled upon
‘The Inn on the Braginka’ in the journal Vokrug sveta (‘Around the World’),
where it had been published as a stand-alone piece in 1946. Bunin had long
forgotten the budding writer who had sent him his early poems thirty years
before, but he was so profoundly moved by Paustovsky’s story that he sent
him a postcard care of his publisher in Moscow to let him know of the ‘rare
joy’ it had given him and that he considered it to be ‘among the best stories
in all of Russian literature’.14 If he needed encouragement to carry on with
his memoirs, Paustovsky could not have wished for more.
   Restless Youth appeared in several instalments in Novyi mir in 1955. It
was only now, a full decade after he began The Faraway Years, that
Paustovsky came to see his memoir as a much bigger project. He wrote in
Novyi mir that Restless Youth was part of a ‘large autobiographical tale, the
subject of which is the formation of a man and a writer’, and that he
intended to write two more books that would bring his life up to the present
day.15 In late 1955, Sovetskii pisatel’, the publishing house of the Soviet
Writers’ Union, issued volumes one and two together as The Story of a Life,
the first time this title was used. Paustovsky completed the third volume in
Tarusa over the course of 1956.
   ‘This is a story,’ Paustovsky wrote in 1958, ‘not history. I am writing my
autobiography adhering strictly to the principle of setting down only what I
have witnessed myself. And so, in this story it is not possible to include
descriptions of everything that happened in the particular place and time
described in this book.’16
   Paustovsky’s choice of title, Povest’ o zhizni in Russian, is significant –
he was not writing a traditional autobiography or memoir, nor was he
writing a history; rather, he was writing his story. The Russian word povest’
has conveyed different meanings over time. If, for example, in the twelfth-
century Tale of Bygone Years – Povest’ vremennykh let – it signifies a
historical chronicle of Kievan Russia’s past, in more recent usage povest’
implies a level of artistic creativity, licence even, that history,
autobiography and memoir generally do not permit. A povest’ in the
modern meaning also refers to a literary work shorter in length than the
typical novel. Thus, Tolstoy’s novella Death of Ivan Ilyich is a povest’, as is
Gogol’s short story The Overcoat. In choosing the word povest’ Paustovsky
is signalling where his work is to be placed in the taxonomy of Russian
literary genres, in terms both of the length of its constituent parts – povesti,
in the plural – and of its debt to the deep structures of narrative that give
shape to this reconstruction of his past.
   ‘For all its naked autobiographism,’ the literary scholar Lev Levitsky
noted, ‘this is not a documentary work but an artistic one, whose entire plan
and every last detail are dictated by its overarching conception.’ The Story
of a Life is not a pedantic accounting of all the things Paustovsky
experienced or the people he knew (indeed, his wives and children are not
mentioned), rather it is a ‘painstaking selection of material and its artistic
generalisation’. The work moves forward less by the dictates of chronology
and more by the power of memory, which gives it its episodic nature, what
Levitsky has called ‘a chain of recollections’.17 The mysterious
interworkings of experience, memory, and meaning that shape Paustovsky’s
Story of a Life are beautifully captured by a line from Gabriel García
Márquez in his own autobiography, Living to Tell the Tale: ‘Life is not what
one lived, but what one remembers and how one remembers it in order to
recount it.’18
   The appearance of each new instalment of his magnum opus provided
further proof of Paustovsky’s ideological heresy. In 1956, Vasily Smirnov, a
prominent official in the Soviet Writers’ Union, denounced Paustovsky as a
‘counterrevolutionary’ in a meeting with a group of writers.19 Two years
later he was publicly attacked on the pages of the literary magazine Zvezda
(‘Star’) in an article titled ‘Notes on one Master’s Party Spirit’.
Paustovsky’s writing was criticised as overly individualistic, lacking in
partiinost’ – full-throated support of the Communist Party, in other words –
and as offering proof that much still needed to be done ‘in the battle for
ideological purity’ in Soviet literature.20 The criticism was neither unfair
nor inaccurate: Paustovsky didn’t care in the least about ‘party spirit’. He
never joined the Communist Party, or any other political party for that
matter.
   The attacks, however, frightened Alexander Tvardovsky, editor of Novyi
mir, who refused to publish the fourth volume in 1958 unless Paustovsky
made major changes. Tvardovsky wanted more heroic workers, politics and
the glories of the early years of the Soviet Union and less ‘poetic solitude,
nature’s beauty and the sea, and art for art’s sake’. He detected in
Paustovsky’s writing an unwarranted ‘pride’ on the author’s part, as though
he were ‘spitting upon “world history” from on high’. And he was
especially upset at the many pages devoted to Babel. There was simply no
way Tvardovsky would permit Paustovsky’s ‘apologetic’ defence of Babel,
who had been arrested and executed as a spy and enemy of the people in
1940, to appear in his journal. When Paustovsky received Tvardovsky’s
comments he was furious. He wrote to Tvardovsky that his remarks were
motivated entirely by political rather than literary concerns and that his
objection to the sections on Babel and his tragic death could only be
explained by Tvardovsky’s anti-Semitism. As this was a ‘matter of
conscience’, Paustovsky refused to make the changes and instructed
Tvardovsky to return the manuscript to him immediately.21
   In the end, Paustovsky published this volume, A Time of Great Hope, and
the next, Southern Adventure, in the journal Oktiabr’ (‘October’) in 1959
and 1960, but only after its editors forced him to make considerable
changes, albeit not to the extent demanded by Tvardovsky.22 Nevertheless,
he carried on with what had become his life’s work, desperate to see it
through to the end and unwilling to allow the critics or frightened editors to
stop him.
   ‘To be frank, we must admit that among us remain dour writers of
memoirs, who look more to the past than to the present and the future,’
observed the literary hack and Party loyalist Vsevolod Kochetov at the 22nd
Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union in October 1961.
‘With their twisted outlook and with a zeal worthy of a better cause, they
poke around in the refuse of their well-frayed memories to unearth
mouldering literary corpses and present them as something that still
lives.’23 It was obvious to the audience who Kochetov had in mind.
   By the late 1950s, Paustovsky’s health was in serious decline. He
suffered from what was then diagnosed as severe asthma but was possibly
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, brought on by a lifetime of heavy
smoking. In August 1960, he suffered the first of a series of heart attacks.
He could barely manage more than a few hours of writing a day and
worried he would never see his work through to the end. After the monthly
Znamia (‘Banner’) refused to publish A Book of Journeys, the sixth and
what would be the final volume, Paustovsky swallowed his pride and
offered the manuscript to Tvardovsky. Novyi mir published it in 1963, but
only after removing everything Paustovsky had to say about the barbarism
of the Stalin years. Paustovsky’s original text was cut in half.24
   As a man and a writer who belonged to no camp, Paustovsky found
himself attacked not only by the Soviet literary establishment but by
dissidents as well. Varlam Shalamov, author of Kolyma Tales, who spent
seventeen years in the Gulag, maligned Kara-Bugaz and Kolkhida for their
silence about the use of convict labour in the construction of these industrial
projects. Paustovsky, he wrote, had been blind to the horrors playing out
right before his very eyes.25 Setting aside the fact that Shalamov only
thought to criticise Paustovsky the year before he died when he was far too
ill to respond, there is an element of truth in his criticism. Paustovsky never
was a dissident or an active foe of the Soviet state; nor did he ever claim to
be. He had never been motivated by politics. As he himself admitted
numerous times, he was a dreamer, an observer, a romantic, an individual
who insisted on living according to his own terms. In his 1984
commencement speech at Williams College, Joseph Brodsky said: ‘The
surest defence against Evil is extreme individualism, originality of thinking,
whimsicality, even – if you will – eccentricity. That is, something that can’t
be feigned, faked, imitated.’26 This was Konstantin Paustovsky.
    Paustovsky was not blind to the nature of the Soviet system, however. As
early as 1920, he wrote in his diary:

  When the Civil War ended and the period of ‘peaceful construction’
  began, everyone immediately saw that ‘the emperor had no clothes’
  and the only power he had was to destroy and wage war. [ . . . ] The
  entire country has been turned into one of Arakcheev’s military
  colonies. A new era has begun – the tempting of the intelligentsia, the
  academicians, the artists and the writers . . . Lord, let this cup pass me
  by.27

   The lyrical romanticism of Paustovsky’s prose blinded critics like
Shalamov to just what it was he was saying in The Story of a Life, but the
clues are unmistakable to the careful reader. Consider Paustovsky’s
handling of the two revolutions of 1917. The collapse of the Romanov
dynasty is depicted as the great national liberation from centuries of
autocratic oppression that it truly was. All of Russia came together to
celebrate this new beginning and a wave of hope and possibility swept over
the land. But, he writes, ‘The idyllic generosity of the first days of the
revolution faded. Entire worlds crumbled and collapsed into dust.’ The
Bolshevik seizure of power in October is not treated as the next step on the
road to a better tomorrow, but as the brutal and senseless victory of an
armed mob. There is nothing heroic in Paustovsky’s passages about what he
saw in Moscow that autumn. Rather, these pages are filled with accounts of
wholesale theft, vandalism, anarchy, brutality and destruction. Paustovsky
himself was caught in the violence, captured by Bolshevik forces, and
nearly executed as a suspected supporter of the Provisional Government.
The politics of the new Soviet government are characterised as ‘harsh’ and
‘pitiless’. An aura of ambivalence hangs over his chapters recounting the
first years of the regime. Even this volume’s title – The Dawn of an
Uncertain Age, the adjective being the key signifier here – leaves no doubt
as to Paustovsky’s attitude to the Bolshevik Revolution. He admits to being
disturbed by the Bolsheviks’ ‘contempt for the culture of the past’. He
refused to pick a side during the years of the civil war and not until 1920,
with the collapse of the White armies, ‘did I realise that there was no other
path forward than the one chosen by my people’.
   This is a shocking, and brave, admission for a Soviet author to make in
1956, especially for one who for years had been criticised for his
ideological deviance. Questioning Stalin’s cult of personality at the time
was one thing; questioning the revolution itself, however, was taboo.
   Paustovsky’s disgust at the ‘brutality, violence and sudden unreason of
the twentieth century’ reverberates throughout The Story of a Life,
regardless of the regime, army or political party responsible. Children’s
skulls bashed in by men wielding rifles; women raped; Jews flayed alive by
Ukrainian gangs; a monastery burned to the ground, the monks shot dead
for a bit of silver; an orphan crushed by a frenzied crowd of starving
refugees; the sugar-white bone of a young soldier’s amputated leg. Such
were the horrors Paustovsky experienced and described with unflinching
honesty. He reminded readers of ‘how thin was the veneer of civilisation
that separated us from a bottomless sea of dark savagery’.
   That savagery touched Paustovsky in the most personal of ways. Among
the happiest moments in his life were the days spent with Uncle Nikolai and
Aunt Maria at their home in Bryansk and then summers at their dacha in
Rëvny. After Georgy Paustovsky left his family, Uncle ‘Kolya’ became a
surrogate father to young Kostik. Paustovsky’s love for his uncle flows
from the pages of his book. In August 1919, Nikolai took his family to
Moscow to escape the advance of General Anton Denikin’s army. There he
spent the next decade working in the Soviet arms industry until his arrest on
26 March 1929 as a foreign spy. He was executed on 21 October. The death
warrant was signed by Genrikh Yagoda, deputy chairman of the OGPU, the
Soviet secret police.28
   In the Stalin years, ‘enemies of the people’ became non-persons. They
disappeared and ceased to exist. Families burned their executed loved ones’
letters and diaries, they removed their pictures from their photo albums, and
if they still mentioned their names, then only in a whisper at night in the
safety of their room when no one else might hear. And yet here is
Paustovsky writing an effusive tribute to his beloved uncle, murdered as a
traitor to his country, while the Soviet Union was still at war with Nazi
Germany. Other victims of Stalin’s terror are memorialised in these pages
as well – the eccentric bibliophile Mikhail Shchelkunov, who was arrested
as a Trotskyite and perished in the Gulag in 1938; the journalist Mikhail
Koltsov, executed as an enemy of the state in 1940. One could add more
names.
   It’s one of the remarkable things about Paustovsky that despite the
horrors he witnessed, he never became cynical or bitter or defeated; rather
he maintained his faith in humanity and his ability to appreciate life’s
infinite beauty. He referred to this as ‘my tendency to see the good in all
things’, a trait others sometimes saw as a weakness. But Paustovsky
couldn’t help himself. It was who he was. He writes that while still a youth,

  I began to notice that the worse reality appeared, the more fully I could
  find all the good that was hidden inside it. I was beginning to realise
  that in life the good and the bad lie side by side. The good can often
  shine through a fog of lies, poverty and suffering, just like at the end of
  some rainy days the fire of the setting sun can pierce the grey clouds
  with its rays. I tried to find signs of the good everywhere.

   He often found these signs in the most unexpected of places and people,
like the poor old man in torn overalls he met in Moscow in the hungry year
of 1918. The man tended a small kitchen garden that produced just enough
to keep him alive, yet he was happy. ‘So, you see, my friend,’ he said to
Paustovsky, ‘it just so happens that this too is a way of life. There are all
sorts of ways to live. You can fight for freedom, you can try to remake
humanity or you can grow tomatoes. Everything has its own price, its own
dignity and its own glory.’
   Not sure he understood, Paustovsky asked him what exactly it was he
was trying to say.
   ‘That we need to be tolerant and understanding. As I see it, that’s the
only real path to freedom. All of us should devote ourselves to the work we
like best, and no one should try to stop us.’
   Tolerance, understanding, respect for the individual. These were
dangerous notions in Paustovsky’s world.

                                        •

News of a forthcoming English translation of The Story of a Life appeared
in 1961 in the Sunday Times, which described Paustovsky, then little known
outside the USSR, as ‘a great storyteller, a stylist of the rarest poetic beauty,
and a man of simplicity and truth’.29 When the first volume appeared three
years later the praise was ecstatic. The Sunday Times again likened the
writing to that of Gogol, Turgenev and Chekhov for its ‘freshness of
response’. The Times Literary Supplement dubbed Paustovsky the ‘Russian
Proust’. The Observer called The Story of a Life ‘one of the supreme
examples of autobiography [ . . . ] a small masterpiece [ . . . ] a classic of
childhood’.30 Reviewers praised the ‘sense of the numinous wonder and
delight’ in Paustovsky’s writing, ‘its lyricism [and] the immediacy of the
portraits of persons, places and events’, and its ‘limpid style [ . . . ] that is
simple, unforced and self-effacing’. The Times noted how ‘Everything he
writes is stripped to the bone until nothing is left except what is vivid and
necessary’.31 (Indeed, Paustovsky laboured over his writing, producing
draft after draft by hand, trimming, revising and cutting every unnecessary
word, as his supremely illegible manuscripts reveal.32)
   The Story of a Life met with a similar reaction in the United States.
Writing in the New York Review of Books, Helen Muchnic called the book
‘profoundly moving, sometimes humorous, often horrifying’ and singled
out its ‘passages of lyric beauty’.33 The reviewer for the New York Times
said it was one of the finest books by a Russian author he had ever read and
highlighted the ‘deceptively simple’ quality of Paustovsky’s prose that
‘captures superbly the emotional atmosphere of a situation and an era’. As
if that were not enough of an endorsement, the review went on to declare
that the greater response to Pasternak’s Doctor Zhivago than to
Paustovsky’s masterpiece could only be characterised as a ‘cosmic literary
injustice’.34
   Similar comments could be heard on the Continent. When Gallimard
published the first four volumes in Paris in 1966, Le Monde praised its
‘lyrisme délicat’ and called Paustovsky ‘un génie du coeur’ – a genius of
the heart.35 The same year Heinrich Böll said that his entire family was
reading the German translation and they were all utterly swept away by it.
Discovering Paustovsky had been for Böll ‘a true revelation’.36
   Paustovsky’s name was first raised in connection with the Nobel Prize in
Literature in the Swedish press in 1962. The voices in support of
Paustovsky inside the Swedish Academy grew, and by 1965 many in the
literary world considered him to be the favourite to win. But the Swedes
had their concerns. The previous year Anders Österling, permanent
secretary of the academy, had been in favour of awarding the prize to
Paustovsky when he was instructed by Gunnar Jarring, Sweden’s
ambassador to the USSR, that this would be viewed as a provocation by the
Soviet government, which was still angry at Pasternak’s win in 1958.
Paustovsky, Jarring warned, was deeply unpopular among the Soviet
leadership. As recently as April 1963, at a meeting of the Presidium of the
Central Committee of the Communist Party, Nikita Khrushchev had gone
on a tirade against Paustovsky over an article he had written years earlier
for Pravda arguing against industrial development around Tarusa. The
academy heeded Jarring’s warning, and the 1964 award went to Jean-Paul
Sartre instead.
   Paustovsky was put forward again the following year, and once more
voices were raised within the academy that giving the prize to him would
cause an international scandal that Sweden ought to avoid. At the same
time, the Soviet government was working frantic ally behind the scenes to
convince the academy to give the prize to its approved candidate, Mikhail
Sholokhov, best known as the author of The Quiet Don.
   Paustovsky was in Rome in October 1965 as the world awaited the
Swedish Academy’s decision. The Italian press was busy trying to secure
interviews with the man almost everyone assumed would be the winner.
Paustovsky, however, harboured no illusions. Politics, not literary merit,
would determine the matter. He told a friend that in light of the Pasternak
affair the Swedes wouldn’t give the award to ‘another non-conformist
Soviet writer’. Paustovsky was right. Days later Sholokhov was announced
as the winner.
   One of Paustovsky’s biggest supporters in Sweden was the poet and critic
Artur Lundkvist. He and his wife had met Paustovsky in the summer of
1962 when he was recovering from a heart attack outside Moscow:

  Marvellously dressed and well mannered, he met us on the veranda of
  the sanatorium. His sincerity was striking. He was open but at the
  same time uncommonly tactful, unlike the typical Soviet man. He had
  the defined, expressive features of someone who had gone through a
  great deal, although without a trace of cruelty. He had the eyes of a
  dreamer and a poet, yet clear and perceptive. Despite his heart trouble,
  he looked strong and youthful for his age, as though he would be more
  at home walking in the woods or in the thick of things rather than at
  his writing desk.

   Although Paustovsky would be considered a finalist for the prize a total
of four times, he never did win.37
   On his famous visit to the Soviet Union in September 1962, the
American poet Robert Frost insisted on meeting Paustovsky. He had
quickly tired of the ‘Intourist Russia’ that was being paraded before him by
his official hosts (thrumming factories, bountiful farms, technological
marvels and so on) and wanted to sit down with a real writer for an honest,
open conversation. From the moment Frost and his American guide, F. D.
Reeve, arrived at Paustovsky’s Moscow apartment, they were struck by ‘an
immediate sense of tranquil, cultured excellence’. Frost and Paustovsky
recognised in each other kindred souls. When Frost told him about his need
for freedom and isolation to write, Paustovsky replied that just like Henry
David Thoreau, he had a small house in the woods to which he retreated to
commune with nature. They traded stories of their youth when they had
wandered about the country from one odd-job to the next. Frost tried to
impress Paustovsky by telling him how he had even jumped freight trains
and ridden in open boxcars. Paustovsky smiled and went him one better –
he, too, he said, had jumped freight trains, although he had often been
forced to ride on the tops of the boxcars. Frost laughed. The evening proved
to be one of the highlights of his trip.38
   By the last decade of his life Paustovsky had become one of the elder
statesmen of Russian letters and a champion of artistic and intellectual
freedom. Time and again he spoke out to defend writers against censorship
and state oppression, from the attacks on Vladimir Dudintsev and his 1956
novel Not by Bread Alone, to the campaigns against Alexander
Solzhenitsyn, Joseph Brodsky, Andrei Sinyavsky and Yuly Daniel, and
Yury Galanskov and his colleagues in the so-called ‘Trial of the Four’ in
1968. He called for the passage of strict laws to protect Russia’s natural
environment, so terribly degraded by the Soviet regime, and when he
learned that local officials in Karelia were planning to raze over a hundred
ancient Russian Orthodox churches, he wrote a letter to Khrushchev
insisting that this barbarism be stopped.39
   Just as he had done in the 1930s when he defended the work and
reputation of the officially unapproved writer Alexander Grin,40 Paustovsky
helped to publish the writings of Marina Tsvetaeva, Anna Akhmatova and
Nadezhda Mandelshtam, and encouraged the careers of younger writers
such as Bulat Okudzhava and Yury Kazakov in two influential and popular
anthologies – Literary Moscow (1956) and Pages from Tarusa (1961) –
publications that were denounced by the Writers’ Union and Soviet
officialdom as ideologically dangerous and quickly suppressed.41
   Paustovsky was back in hospital in May 1968, for the last time.
Nevertheless, he refused to remain silent. When official pressure was being
exerted on the experimental Theatre on the Taganka and its brilliant lead
director, Yury Lyubimov, Paustovsky telephoned Alexei Kosygin, first
deputy premier of the Soviet Union: ‘This is the dying writer Paustovsky on
the phone,’ he said. ‘I implore you not to destroy our country’s cultural
treasures. If you fire Lyubimov, his theatre will collapse, and the great work
they’re doing there will perish.’ Lyubimov kept his job, and the theatre was
saved.42
   In the last year of his life Paustovsky worked on the seventh volume of
The Story of a Life. He died in Moscow on 14 July 1968 without managing
to complete it. A brief testament was found in his writing desk: ‘We lived
on this earth. Don’t entrust it into the hands of the destroyers, the barbarians
and the ignoramuses. We are the heirs of Pushkin, and we will have to
answer for that.’43
   At the end of Restless Youth, Paustovsky wrote of his life in March 1917:
    I didn’t know what would come next. But I knew that I would continue
    to strive with all my strength to become a writer. This would be my
    way of serving my people, of loving our magical language and our
    remarkable land. I would work as long as I could hold a pen and my
    heart, overflowing with the beauty of life, was still beating.

    He had kept his word.

                                                            —Douglas Smith


1 Marlene Dietrich, My Life, translated by Salvator Attanasio (London:
Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 1989), 135–6, 221, 227; interview with Galina
Arbuzova, Tarusa, Russia, 8 Sep. 2019; Desert Island Discs, BBC Home
Service, 5 Jan. 1965, https://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p009y4dy,
accessed 11 Jan. 2021.
2 ‘Konstantin Paustovsky: lyrical writer of Russia’, The Times, 16 July
1968. On Paustovsky’s popularity in the USSR, see Lev Lobov and Kira
Vasil’eva, ‘On otdal svoë serdtse Rossii’, Kul’tura, 25:7638 (2008),
http://www.peredelkino-
land.ru/HTML/press_stroenie_stoyaschee_otdelno.shtml, accessed 11 Jan.
2021.
3   Interview with Galina Arbuzova, Tarusa, Russia, 8 Sep. 2019.
4   Konstantin Paustovskii, ‘Neskol’ko otryvochnykh myslei. Vmesto
predisloviia,’ in Sobranie sochinenii (Moscow: Khudozhestvennaia
literatura, 1967), 1:5–17.
5 Konstantin Paustovskii, Vremia bol’shikh ozhidanii: povesti, dnevniki,
pis’ma (Nizhnii Novgorod: Dekom, 2002), 1:8.
6   Ibid., 1:11; ‘Iz dnevnikov’, Mir Paustovskogo, 15 (2000).
7 Paustovskii, Vremia bol’shikh ozhidanii, 1:11; ‘Put’ k masterstvu’, letter
dated 24 Jul. 1929, Mir Paustovskogo, 25 (2007).
8S. Olivier, ‘Paustovskii v nachale XXI veka’, in V. A. Pimneva et al. (eds),
Literaturnoe nasledie K. G. Paustovskogo i mirovaia kul’tura (Moscow:
Moskovskii literaturnyi muzei-tsentr K. G. Paustovskogo, 2013), 18.
9   Maksim Gorkii, Sobranie sochinenii (Moscow: Khudozhestvennaia
literatura, 1953), 27:108; Konstantin Paustovskii, Sobranie sochinenii
(Moscow: Goslitizdat, 1957), 1:644–5. Kara-Bugaz appeared in English as
The Black Gulf (London: Hutchinson, 1946).
10Konstantin Paustovskii, ‘Neskol’ko grubykh slov’, Russian State Archive
of Literature and Art, Collection 617, Inventory 1, Folder 58; ‘Na puti k
masterstvu’, letters dated 2 Sep. 1929 and 28 Nov. 1931, Mir Paustovskogo,
25 (2007).
11Konstantin Paustovskii, ‘Zhizn’’, Ogonëk, 26 (1945), 5; A. Muravinskaia
and V. Ashcheulov, ‘Paustovskii na Altae’, Altai, 4 (1982), 110–13.
12 Konstantin Paustovskii, Povest’ o zhizni (Moscow: TERRA, 2017),
1:550.
13   Paustovskii, Vremia bol’shikh ozhidanii, 1:16.
14Bunin’s postcard, dated 15 Sep. 1947, is in the collection of the K. G.
Paustovsky Museum in Moscow.
15   Novyi mir, 3 (1955), 3.
16   Oktiabr’, 3 (1959), 3.
17   Paustovskii, Povest’ o zhizni, 1:550–52.
18   Epigraph to Living to Tell the Tale (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 2003).
19Kornei Chukovskii, Dnevnik, 1901–1969 (Moscow: Sovetskii pisatel’,
1994), 245.
20   Mir Paustovskogo, 30 (2012), 8–10.
21 Mir Paustovskogo, 30 (2012), 22–3; Paustovskii, Vremia bol’shikh
ozhidanii, 1:19.
22Russian State Archive of Literature and Art, Collection 1128, Inventory,
645, Folder 1 contains some of the many edits demanded of Paustovsky to
volume five by Oktiabr’ prior to publication.
23
 John Sendy, ‘In Memory of Paustovsky’, Australian Left Review (April–
May 1969), 72.
24  Galina Burlaeva, ‘Literaturnyi arkhiv K. G. Paustovskogo v
Moskovskom muzei-tsentre pisatelia’, in Pimneva et al. (eds), Literaturnoe
nasledie, 488; Mir Paustovskogo, 23 (2005), 66–7.
25 Mir Paustovskogo, 21 (2004), 97–100; also Olivier, ‘Paustovskii v
nachale XXI veka’, 14–15.
26Joseph Brodsky, ‘A Commencement Address’, New York Review of
Books, 16 Aug. 1984.
27   Mir Paustovskogo, 23 (2005), 7–23.
28V. A. Bobkov, ‘Zhizn’ i deiatel’nost’ N. G. Vysochanskogo na Brianskoi
zemle’, Vestnik Brianskogo gosuniversiteta, 2 (2009), 6–11; Mir
Paustovskogo, 15 (2000), 47–53.
29   Vera Lindsay, ‘Childhood under the Tsars’, Sunday Times, 29 Jan. 1961.
30Raymond Mortimer, ‘“The greatest living Russian author” in England’;
Vera and John Russell, ‘A lifetime in revolution’, Sunday Times, 27 Sep.
1964; ‘Russian Proust’, Times Literary Supplement, 1 May 1969; Observer
quotes from advertisements in the TLS, 16 Feb. 1967, 125 and The Times, 8
Oct. 1964, 15.
31 Jeremy Rundall, ‘Draught of the South’, Sunday Times, 16 Mar. 1969;
‘Konstantin Paustovsky: lyrical writer of Russia’; Lesley Branch, ‘Jackals
among the azaleas’, The Times, 15 Mar. 1969; ‘Paustovsky when young’,
The Times, 8 Oct. 1964; ‘Self-portrait of an artist in years of revolution’,
The Times, 4 Nov. 1965; Iverach McDonald, ‘Russia going red’, The Times,
9 Feb. 1967.
32The manuscripts are in Moscow’s Russian State Archive of Literature
and Art.
33   ‘A Russian Soul’, New York Review of Books, 20 Aug. 1964.
34 Orville Prescott, ‘Books of the Times: A Magnificent Surprise from
Russia’, New York Times, 1 Jul. 1964. See also Harrison E. Salisbury,
‘Through the Tumult and the Thaw’, New York Times. 3 May 1964.
35Piotr Rawicz, ‘Une grande chronique de la révolution russe’, Le Monde,
26 Mar. 1966.
36   Mir Paustovskogo, 30 (2012), 33.
37 A. M. Blokh, Sovetskii Soiuz v inter’ere nobelevskikh premii: fakty,
dokumenty, razmyshlenniia, komentarii (St Petersburg: Gumanistika, 2001),
678–9, 724–8; Kjell Espmark, The Nobel Prize in Literature: A Study
behind the Criteria of the Choices (Boston: G. K. Hall, 1991), 186;
Paustovskii, Vremia bol’shikh ozhidanii, 1:21, 23; Mir Paustovskogo, 23
(2005), 65; Chukovskii, Dnevnik, 381.
38 F. D. Reeve, Robert Frost in Russia (Brookline, MA: Zephyr Press,
[1964] 2001), 40, 45, 47–53.
39 Paustovskii, Vremia bol’shikh ozhidanii, 1:14, 19–24; Chukovskii,
Dnevnik, 333, 502–3; Lobov and Vasil’eva, ‘On otdal svoë serdtse Rossii’,
46–76; ‘Russians ask for review of trial’, The Times, 16 Feb. 1968;
‘Konstantin Paustovsky: lyrical writer of Russia’.
40  On Paustovsky and Grin, see K. G. Paustovskii, ‘Aleksandr Grin’, God
XXII, 15 (1939); ‘Zhizn’ Aleksandra Grina’, Konstantin Paustovsky
website,       http://paustovskiy-lit.ru/paustovskiy/public/zhizn-aleksandra-
grina.htm, accessed 25 Feb. 2021; ‘Uchastie Paustovskogo v izdanii
sochinenii A. Grina’, Konstantin Paustovsky website, http://paustovskiy-
lit.ru/paustovskiy/bio/uchastiepaustovskogo-v-izdanii-grina.htm, accessed
11 Jan. 2021.
41    Literaturnaia Moskva: literaturno-khudozhestvennvyi sbornik
Moskovskikh pisatelei (Moscow: Khudozhestvennaia literatura, 1956);
Tarusskie stranitsy: literaturno-khudozhestvennyi illiustrirovannyi sbornik
(Kaluga: Kaluzhskoe knizhnoe izdatel’stvo, 1961); Paustovskii, Vremia
bol’shikh ozhidanii, 1:18, 20; Blokh, Sovetskii Soiuz v inter’ere
nobelevskikh premii, 730.
42   Chukovskii, Dnevnik, 444.
43   Paustovskii, Vremia bol’shikh ozhidanii, 1:24.

                                 OceanofPDF.com
OceanofPDF.com
THE STORY OF A LIFE



                  OceanofPDF.com
Book One
THE FARAWAY YEARS



                OceanofPDF.com
My life, or did I dream you?

                         Sergei Yesenin

                       OceanofPDF.com
1
The Death of My Father



I was in my last year of school in Kiev when the telegram came saying that
my father was dying on the farm at Gorodishche, near Belaya Tserkov. The
next day I arrived at Belaya Tserkov and stopped at the house of my father’s
good friend Feoktistov, head of the local post office. He was a short-sighted
old man with thick glasses and a long beard and wore a shabby old official’s
jacket with the brass insignia of the postal service, crossed horns and
lightning bolts, on his lapels.
   It was the end of March. Rain was coming down in a steady drizzle.
Naked poplars stood shrouded in fog. Feoktistov told me that the ice on the
swiftly flowing river Ros had gone out the night before. The farm where my
father was dying was on an island in the middle of this river, twenty versts1
from Belaya Tserkov. A stone causeway across the river led to the farm.
Flood water was now pouring over the causeway in waves, and no one, of
course, would agree to take me to the island, not even the most reckless of
coachmen.
   Feoktistov thought for a long time, contemplating which coachman in
Belaya Tserkov was the most reckless. In the half-light of Feoktistov’s
drawing room his daughter Zina, a schoolgirl, sat diligently practising the
piano. The music caused the leaves on the ficus to tremble. I stared at a
pale, dried-out piece of lemon on a small dish and kept silent.
   ‘Well, let’s call Bregman, the old rascal,’ Feoktistov finally decided.
‘Nothing frightens him.’
   Soon, into Feoktistov’s study, overflowing with volumes of The Planted
Field in their gold-tooled covers, walked Bregman the driver – ‘the biggest
rascal’ in all of Belaya Tserkov. He was a dwarfish, thick-set Jew with a
scraggy beard and the blue eyes of a cat. His weather-beaten cheeks were
the red of heavenly apples. He twisted in his hands a small whip and
listened, sceptically, to Feoktistov.
   ‘Oy, what a misfortune!’ he said at last in a falsetto voice. ‘Oy, what bad
luck, Pan Feoktistov! My carriage is light, and my horses are weak. Gypsy
horses! They won’t pull us across the causeway. We’ll all drown – the
horses, the carriage, the young man and the old driver. And they won’t even
bother so much as to print a word about it in Kievan Thought. Well, that’s
just unbearable, Pan Feoktistov. Go? Well, of course, we can go. Why not?
You yourself know a driver’s life is worth no more than three silver roubles
– or maybe five, or let’s say ten, I won’t argue.’
   ‘Thank you, Bregman,’ said Feoktistov. ‘I knew you’d be willing. You’re
the bravest man in Belaya Tserkov. For this I’ll buy you a subscription to
The Planted Field for the rest of the year.’
   ‘Well, if I’m really so brave,’ Bregman laughed with a squeak, ‘then
you’d better make it The Russian Invalid. At least there I can read all about
the young soldiers and the knights of St George. The horses will be at your
door in an hour, Pan.’ Bregman left.

                                      •

There had been a strange sentence in the telegram I received in Kiev: ‘Bring
a priest with you from Belaya Tserkov, either Orthodox or Roman Catholic,
it doesn’t matter, just so long as he comes.’ I knew my father and so the
sentence bothered and upset me. My father was an atheist. His jokes about
priests of both confessions had led to endless clashes with my grandmother,
a Pole and a religious fanatic like so many Polish women.
   I guessed that my father’s sister, Feodosia Maximovna, or, as everyone
called her, Aunt Dozia, had insisted on the priest. She rejected all church
rites except absolution. She had replaced the Bible with Shevchenko’s
Kobzar,2 which she kept hidden in an iron-bound trunk and which was just
as yellowed and wax-splattered as a Bible. Sometimes at night Aunt Dozia
would take it out and read ‘Katerina’ by candlelight, constantly dabbing her
eyes with a dark kerchief. She grieved over Katerina’s fate, so similar to her
own. In the damp grove behind her cottage was the grave, covered in
greenery, of her son, ‘the little fellow’, who had died many years ago when
Aunt Dozia was still quite young. This boy had been, as people used to say,
her ‘unlawful’ son. The man Aunt Dozia loved had betrayed her. He left
her, but she remained true to him until death, and she kept waiting for him
to return to her. For some reason she was certain he was sick, penniless, ill-
fated, and she, after having cursed him out as he deserved, would in the end
take him back and treat him with kindness.

                                      •

None of the Orthodox priests would go to Gorodishche, claiming to be sick
or too busy. Only one young Catholic priest was willing to go. He warned
me that we’d first have to stop at the church for the Holy Sacrament needed
for the dying man’s last rites, and that no one was allowed to speak with
someone carrying the Holy Sacrament. The priest wore a long, pleated
overcoat with a velvet collar and a strange round hat, which was also black.
It was gloomy and cold inside the church. Wilted red paper roses hung at
the base of the crucifix. Without candles, without the ringing of bells,
without the rolling of the organ, the church had the appearance of the wings
of a theatre by dull daylight.
    At first we rode in silence. There was only the sound of Bregman
smacking his lips and hurrying on his gaunt bays. He shouted at them as all
drivers do – ‘G’on’ and ‘Ya!’ The unkempt gardens echoed with the sound
of the rain. The priest held the pyx which had been wrapped in black serge.
My grey school overcoat became soaked through and turned black. Out of
the mist the famous Alexandria Gardens of Countess Branitskaya appeared
to reach all the way up to the sky.3 These were extensive gardens, equal in
size, Feoktistov told me, to those at Versailles. The snow there was melting,
wrapping the trees in cold mist. Turning round, Bregman said there were
wild deer in the gardens.
    ‘Mickiewicz loved these gardens very much,’4 I told the priest, having
forgotten he had to keep silent the whole way. I had wanted to say
something pleasant as a way of thanking him for agreeing to come on this
difficult and dangerous trip. The priest smiled in reply.
    Rainwater stood in the sodden fields, reflecting the jackdaws flying
overhead. I raised the collar of my coat and thought of my father, about how
little I knew him. He had been a statistician and had worked nearly his
entire life on various railways – the Moscow–Brest, Petersburg–Warsaw,
Kharkov–Sevastopol and South-Western lines. We had moved often from
town to town – from Moscow to Pskov, then to Vilnius, and finally to Kiev.
Father always had trouble getting along with his superiors. He was touchy
and hot-tempered but a kind man. A year earlier my father had left Kiev and
taken a job as a statistician at a factory in Bryansk, in Orël province. He had
not been there long when he quite unexpectedly quit his job for no good
reason and returned to my grandfather’s old farm at Gorodishche. His
brother, Ilko, a village teacher, lived there, along with Aunt Dozia.
   My father’s inexplicable act upset all his relatives, my mother most of all.
At the time she was living in Moscow with my eldest brother. A month after
arriving at Gorodishche my father fell ill, and now he was dying.
   The road ran downhill through a ravine. At the road’s end could be heard
the persistent sound of rushing water. Bregman began to fidget up in his
box. ‘The causeway!’ he said, sombrely. ‘Now’s the time for my passengers
to pray!’
   The causeway suddenly came into view around a bend in the road. The
priest made to stand up and grabbed Bregman by his faded red sash. The
water was rushing fast between the granite rocks. At this spot the Ros
breaks through the Avratinska Hills with a fury. The water was flowing over
the causeway in a clear wave, cascading down like thunder and filling the
air with a cold spray. Across the river, on the far side of the causeway, the
enormous poplars seemed to practically leap into the sky, and one could
make out a small white house. I recognised the farm on the island where I
had lived as a small boy – its thickets and wattle fences, the tall yokes
beside the wells, and the rocks by the riverbanks. They cut the river into
separate, powerful streams. Long ago my father and I had fished for
whiskered gudgeon from those rocks.
   Bregman stopped the horses near the causeway, climbed down,
straightened the harness with the handle of his whip, looked at his carriage
doubtfully, and shook his head. At that moment the priest finally broke his
oath of silence.
   ‘Jesus-Maria!’ he uttered in a low voice. ‘How are we going to get
across?’
   ‘Ahh, how should I know?’ Bregman replied. ‘Just sit quiet. The horses
are already shaking all over.’
   The horses threw back their heads, snorted, and then walked into the
rushing water. It roared and knocked the light carriage to the unguarded side
of the causeway. The carriage shifted at an angle and began to move
sideways, its metal wheels screeching. The horses trembled, tried to steady
themselves, and nearly lay down in the water to keep from being swept
away. Bregman swung his whip over their heads. Halfway across the
causeway, where the current was strongest, making a loud ringing sound,
the horses came to a stop. The foaming rapids beat against their thin legs.
Bregman let out a wail and began to whip the horses mercilessly. They
moved backwards, pushing the carriage to the very edge of the causeway.
Then I caught sight of Uncle Ilko. He was galloping on a grey horse from
the farm to the causeway. He was yelling something and waving a coil of
thin rope over his head.
   He rode up onto the causeway and tossed Bregman the rope. Bregman
hurriedly tied it to something under the carriage box, and then the three
horses – two bays and a grey – finally dragged the carriage onto the island.
The priest crossed himself with a sweeping gesture. Bregman winked at
Uncle Ilko and said that folks would long remember such a fine driver as
that old Bregman. I asked about my father.
   ‘Still alive,’ Ilko replied, and kissed me, scratching my face with his
beard. ‘He’s waiting for you. But where’s your mother, Maria Grigorievna?’
   ‘I sent her a telegram in Moscow. She should arrive tomorrow.’
   Uncle Ilko looked at the river. ‘It’s still rising,’ he said. ‘That’s bad, my
dear Kostik. Well, perhaps that’s the worst of it. Let’s go!’
   We were met on the porch by Aunt Dozia, all in black, her eyes dried out
from so much crying. The stuffy rooms smelled of mint. At first I did not
recognise my father in the yellowed old man with the grey stubble on his
cheeks. My father was only fifty years old. I had always remembered him
as a slightly stooped but well-built man, elegant, dark-haired with an
unusually sad smile and attentive grey eyes.
   Now he sat in his chair, breathing heavily, and looking intently at me, a
lone tear running down his dry cheek. It stuck on his beard, and Aunt Dozia
wiped it away with a clean handkerchief. My father couldn’t speak. He was
dying of throat cancer. I sat by my father all night. Everyone else slept. The
rain stopped. The stars shone sullenly outside the windows. The river raged
ever louder. The water kept rising. Bregman and the priest could not get
back and were now trapped on the island. My father stirred in the middle of
the night and opened his eyes. I leaned over him. He tried to put his arms
around my neck but couldn’t and then said in a raspy whisper: ‘I fear . . .
your lack of character . . . will be the ruin of you.’
   ‘No,’ I replied. ‘That won’t happen.’
   ‘When you see your mama,’ he whispered. ‘I failed her . . . May she
forgive me . . .’
   He grew quiet and weakly squeezed my hand. At the time I did not
understand his words, and only much later, after many years, did their bitter
meaning become clear to me. I also came to understand much later that my
father had never really been a statistician at all, but a poet. He died towards
dawn, but at first I didn’t realise this. It seemed to me that he had quietly
fallen asleep.
   An old man named Nechipor lived with us on the island. We called him
to come and read the psalms over Father. Nechipor frequently broke off his
readings to go out into the front hall and smoke his cheap tobacco. There in
a whisper he’d tell me the simple stories that stirred his imagination – about
a bottle of wine he’d drunk the previous summer at Belaya Tserkov, about
how he’d seen Skobelev himself,5 so close in fact ‘as that hedge right
there’, at Plevna, about an amazing American threshing machine powered
by a lightning rod. Old man Nechipor was, as they said on the island, ‘a
simple man’ – a liar and a gasbag. He read the psalms all day and
throughout the following night, picking wax off the sides of the candles
with his black fingernails, falling asleep where he stood, snorting himself
awake, and then carrying on with his mumbled prayers.
   That night someone on the other side of the river began yelling and
waving a lantern. I went to the riverbank with Uncle Ilko. The river was
raging. The water raced over the causeway in an icy cascade. It was late and
dark, not a single star shone over our heads. The wind blew the raw
freshness of the flood and thawing earth into our faces. And the whole time
someone on the far bank kept shouting and waving a lantern, but not a word
could be made out over the noise of the river.
   ‘That must be Mama,’ I said to Uncle Ilko, but he did not respond.
   ‘Let’s go,’ he said, and then was quiet. ‘It’s cold out here on the banks.
You’ll catch cold.’
   I didn’t want to go back to the house. Uncle Ilko was silent for a while
and then left, but I stayed and kept watching the lantern in the distance. The
wind blew ever stronger, bending the poplars, and carrying the slightly
sweet smoke of burning straw from somewhere far off. We buried Father in
the morning. Nechipor and Uncle Ilko dug a grave in the grove on the edge
of the ravine. From there one could make out the woods beyond the Ros in
the distance and the whitish March sky. We carried the coffin from the
house on wide, embroidered straps. The priest walked in front. He looked
straight ahead with his calm, grey eyes and murmured Latin prayers.
   Once we got the coffin out onto the steps, I caught sight on the far side of
the river of an old carriage with some untethered horses and a small woman
in black – Mama. She was standing motionless on the riverbank. She saw
that we were carrying Father from the house. She dropped to her knees and
her head fell to the ground. The tall, gaunt driver went up and leaned over
her. He said something, but she just lay there, not moving. Then she jumped
up and began running along the bank towards the causeway. The driver
grabbed her. She sank helplessly to the ground and covered her face with
her hands.
   We carried Father along the road to the grave. At the bend, I turned to
look. Mama was still sitting with her face buried in her hands. We were all
silent, but Bregman kept slapping his whip against the side of his boot. By
the graveside the priest lifted his eyes to the cold sky and then said clearly
and slowly in Latin: ‘Requiem aeternam dona eis, Domine, et lux perpetua
luceat eis!’ Grant unto him eternal rest, O Lord, and let perpetual light shine
upon him.
   Then the priest fell silent and listened. The river roared and overhead the
tomtits called to each other in the branches of the old elms. The priest
sighed and began to speak again about man’s eternal longing for happiness
and the valley of tears. These words were remarkably fitting for my father’s
life. They made my heart ache. Ever since I have often felt that same pain
when confronting this thirst for happiness and the imperfection of human
relations. The river kept on roaring, the birds whistled cautiously, and as the
coffin was slowly lowered on its straps into the grave it knocked loose clods
of damp earth. I was then seventeen.


1   A verst (versta) was equal to 1.06 kilometres or 0.66 miles.
2 A book of poems published in 1840 by Ukrainian national poet Taras
Shevchenko (1814–61).
3 Countess Alexandra Branitskaya (1754–1838), niece of Prince Grigory
Potëmkin.
4 Adam Mickiewicz (1798–1855), Polish poet and dramatist and national
hero.
5 Mikhail Skobelev (1843–82), famous Russian general and victor of the
Siege of Plevna (1877) against the Ottoman Turks.

                          OceanofPDF.com
2
My Grandfather Maxim Grigorievich



I remained at Gorodishche for a few days after my father’s funeral. Only
the following day, after the water had gone down, could my mother cross
the causeway. Mother looked haggard, her face dark, and though she had
stopped crying, still she sat for hours at Father’s grave. It was too early for
fresh flowers, so we’d decorated the grave with paper peonies. Girls from
the neighbouring village had made them. They loved to braid these peonies
into their hair together with silk ribbons of various colours.
    Aunt Dozia tried to comfort and distract me. She dragged a trunk filled
with old things out of the store room. The lid made a loud creak. Inside I
found a yellowed hetman charter in Latin, a copper seal with a coat of arms,
a St George’s medal from the Turkish War, a book of dream interpretations,
a few smoked-out pipes and some incredibly fine black lace.
    The charter and seal had remained in our family since the time of Hetman
Sahaidachny, a distant ancestor. My father had laughed about our ‘hetman
origins’ and loved to say that our grandfathers and great-grandfathers had
tilled the soil and been the most ordinary and long-suffering of peasants,
even though they believed themselves to be the descendants of Zaporozhian
Cossacks. When the Zaporozhian Sich1 was disbanded by Catherine the
Great, some of the Cossacks settled on the banks of the Ros, near Belaya
Tserkov. The Cossacks reluctantly became farmers. Their wild past
continued to simmer in their blood for a long time. Even I, born at the end
of the nineteenth century, heard the old-timers’ tales of the bloody battles
with the Poles, campaigns against the Turks, the ‘Uman Slaughter’ and the
Chyhyryn Hetman.
    Having filled ourselves with these stories, my brothers and I would fight
our own Zaporozhian battles. We’d play in the ravine behind the farm, out
by the fence that was densely overgrown with thistles. In the heat their red
flowers and prickly leaves gave off a sickly sweet smell. The clouds would
hover in the sky over the ravine – lazy and puffy, true Ukrainian clouds. So
powerful are childhood impressions that ever since those days every battle
against the Poles and Turks is linked in my imagination with that wild field,
overgrown with thistles, and its dusty, intoxicating aroma. And the thistle
flowers themselves reminded me of clots of Cossack blood.
   With the years the Zaporozhians’ hot-bloodedness cooled. During my
childhood it was only evident in the ruinous lawsuits that went on for years
against Countess Branitskaya over every little piece of land, in the
persistent poaching, and in the Cossack folk songs. Our grandfather Maxim
Grigorievich would tell them to us, his grandchildren.
   Small, grey-haired, with kind dull eyes, he lived every summer with his
beehives out beyond the meadow to avoid the wrathful nature of my
Turkish grandmother. Long ago my grandfather had been an oxcart driver.
He had gone as far as Perekop and Armyansk for salt and dried fish. It was
from him I first heard that somewhere beyond the light blue and golden
steppes around Yekaterinoslav and Kherson lay the heavenly land of
Crimea. Before becoming a driver he had served in Nicholas’s army, fought
in the Turkish War, been captured and then returned from the town of
Kazanlak in Thrace with a wife – a beautiful Turkish woman. Her name
was Fatma. Upon marrying my grandfather, she adopted Christianity and a
new name: Honorata.
   We feared our Turkish grandmother no less than our grandfather did, and
we tried to stay out of her sight. Sitting among the yellow pumpkin
blossoms near his hut, Grandfather would sing in his trembling tenor the old
Cossack songs and the ballads of the oxcart drivers or tell us all sorts of
stories. I loved the drivers’ songs for their plaintive spirit. You could sing
such songs for hours on end to the squeaking wheels, lying on your cart,
staring at the heavens. The Cossack songs always evoked a strange sadness.
To me they sounded either like the cry of captives in Turkish chains or
valiant battle hymns to be sung to the sound of horses’ hooves.
   Our favourite of Grandfather’s stories was the tale of Ostap the lyrist. I
don’t know whether you’ve ever seen a Ukrainian lyre. Now you can
probably only find them in museums, but in those days you would see blind
lyre players not only at small-town markets but even in Kiev itself. They’d
walk with their hand on the shoulder of their guide, a barefoot boy in a
sackcloth shirt. On their backs they’d carry a canvas sack with bread,
onions and salt in a clean rag, and a lyre hung across their chests. It looked
like a violin, but had a handle attached to it and a wooden rod with a small
wheel. The lyre player would turn the handle round and round, the wheel
would spin, rubbing against the strings that would vibrate in different keys,
as if he were being accompanied by a swarm of friendly bumblebees
buzzing around him.
   The lyrists almost never sang. Rather, they performed their folk songs,
ballads and psalms in a sing-song recitative. Then they stopped and would
listen to the buzzing sound of the lyre as it slowly died away, after which,
looking about with their unseeing eyes, they begged for alms. They didn’t
beg like most paupers. I recall one lyre player in Cherkassy. ‘Toss us, a poor
blind man and his little boy, a half-kopeck,’ he’d say, ‘for without him the
blind man will lose his way and won’t find the path to God’s Kingdom
when the time comes.’
   I can’t recall a single market without a lyre player. He’d sit leaning up
against a dusty poplar. Compassionate women would crowd around and
sigh as they dropped their greenish copper coins in his wooden bowl. The
image of the lyre players has remained forever linked for me with the
memory of the Ukrainian markets – markets held early in the morning,
when the dew still glistens on the grass, cold shadows lie across the dusty
roads, and bluish smoke wafts over the earth, already lit by the sun.
   Misty stoneware jugs of ice-cold milk, wet marigolds in pails of water,
pots of buckwheat honey, hot cheesecakes with raisins, sieves with cherries,
the smell of sea roach, the languid ringing of church bells, the impetuous
haggling of the market women, the lacy parasols of the young provincial
ladies of fashion, and the sudden bang of a copper kettle carried on the
shoulders of some Romanian with wild eyes – every old man considered it
his duty to knock on the kettle with the handle of his whip to see whether
Romanian copper really was any good.
   I know the story of Ostap the lyrist practically by heart. ‘It happened in
the village of Zamoshye near the town of Vasilkov,’ Grandfather told us.
‘Ostap was the village blacksmith. His smithy was at the edge of the village
under some dark, brooding willows overhanging the river. Ostap could
make anything – horseshoes, nails, axles for ox-carts. One summer evening
Ostap was stoking the coals in his smithy when a thunderstorm broke,
scattering leaves into the puddles and blowing down an old willow. Ostap
stoked the coals and suddenly he heard the heavy pounding of horses’
hooves coming to a stop by his forge. A voice – young and female – called
the blacksmith.
   ‘Ostap went out and froze – at the very doors of the smithy pranced a
black steed, and on it sat a woman of heavenly beauty, in a black velvet
dress, with a switch, and a veil over her face. Her eyes were laughing
behind the veil. Her teeth were laughing too. The velvet of her dress was
soft and dark, and upon it sparkled raindrops that had fallen onto the
woman from the dark willows after the rain. And next to her on another
steed sat a young officer. At the time a regiment of uhlans was quartered at
Vasilkov.
   ‘“My dear blacksmith,” said the woman, “shoe my horse, he’s lost a
shoe. The road is terribly slippery after the storm.”
   ‘The woman got down from the saddle and sat on a log, and Ostap began
to shoe the horse. As he worked, he couldn’t stop stealing glances at the
woman, and then suddenly she became agitated, threw off her veil and
returned Ostap’s glances.
   ‘“I’ve never met you before,” Ostap said to her. “Maybe you’re not from
around here?”
   ‘“I am from St Petersburg,” answered the woman. “You’re very good at
your work.”
   ‘“Shoeing a horse is nothing!” Ostap said to her softly. “I can forge
something out of iron for you finer than anything any empress has.”
   ‘“What sort of thing?” the woman asked.
   ‘“Whatever you want. Well, for example, I can make you the most
delicate rose with leaves and thorns.”
   ‘“Wonderful!” replied the woman just as softly. “Thank you, blacksmith.
I shall come for it in a week.”
   ‘Ostap helped her back up into the saddle. She gave him a gloved hand to
steady herself, and Ostap was overcome by emotion. He clung to her hand
fervently. Before she could pull her hand away, the officer struck Ostap
across the face with his switch and yelled: “Know your place, peasant!”
   ‘The horses reared and galloped off. Ostap grabbed his hammer to throw
at the officer but had to put it down. So much blood was running down his
face that he couldn’t see a thing. The officer had injured one of his eyes.
But Ostap didn’t let this stop him, and he worked on the rose for six days.
Various people came to see it and they all agreed that even in the land of
Italy you couldn’t find such craftsmanship. On the night of the seventh day,
someone quietly rode up to the smithy, dismounted and tied their horse to
the fence. Ostap was afraid to go out or to even show his face – he covered
his eyes with his hands and waited. He heard light footsteps and breathing,
and someone’s warm arms embraced him, and a single warm tear fell on his
shoulders.
   ‘“I know, I know everything,” the woman said. “My heart has been
aching these past days. Forgive me, Ostap. I am the cause of your great
misfortune. I’ve driven my fiancé away and am now leaving for St
Petersburg.”
   ‘“But why?” Ostap asked.
   ‘“My dear, my love,” said the woman, “no matter what, people will never
let us live in peace.”
   ‘“As you wish,” Ostap replied. “I’m a simple man, a blacksmith. Just
thinking of you brings me joy.”
   ‘The woman took the rose, kissed Ostap and slowly rode off. Ostap went
to his door, watched her go and listened. Twice the woman stopped her
horse. Twice she wanted to turn round and go back. But she did not. The
stars in the sky danced over the valleys and fell upon the steppe, as if the
night sky itself were weeping over their love. So it was, my boy!’
   Grandfather always fell silent at this point in the story. I sat afraid to
move. Then I’d ask in a whisper: ‘And they never saw each other again?’
   ‘No,’ Grandfather would answer. ‘That’s right, never again. Ostap began
to lose his sight. He thought about going all the way to St Petersburg to see
this woman before going blind. And he did walk all the way to the tsar’s
capital, only to learn that she had died – possibly because she couldn’t bear
their separation. Ostap found her tombstone of white marble in a graveyard
there. He looked and then his heart broke – on the marble lay his iron rose.
The woman had instructed that it be placed on her grave. Ostap took up the
lyre and most likely died out on the high road or perhaps under his cart in
some market town. Amen!’
   Listening to Grandfather’s story, Ryabchik, a shaggy dog with burrs
stuck to his muzzle, yawned loudly. I gave him an angry nudge in the side,
but far from taking offence, Ryabchik nuzzled up looking to be patted and
licking me with his hot tongue. Ryabchik had only a few broken teeth left in
his mouth. Last autumn, as we were leaving Gorodishche, he bit down on
one of the wheels – he wanted to stop our carriage – and broke all his teeth.
   Oh, Grandfather Maxim Grigorievich! I owe some of my excessive
impressionability and romanticism to him. They turned my youth into a
series of collisions with reality. This caused me suffering, but still I knew
my grandfather was right, and that a life based on soberness and common
sense might be good for others, but for me would be burdensome and
fruitless. ‘One man’s meat is another man’s poison,’ Grandfather liked to
say. Maybe that’s why my grandfather could not get along with my
grandmother or, more accurately, hid from her. Her Turkish blood did not
give her one attractive trait, except for her beautiful yet formidable physical
appearance.
   My grandmother was a tyrant and a nag. She smoked at least a pound of
the strongest tobacco a day in her small, scorching-hot pipes. She ran the
household, and her black eyes noticed the slightest disorder in the house.
On holidays she’d put on a satin dress fringed with black lace, go out and
sit on the small earthen mound by the house, smoke her pipe, and watch the
rapid waters of the Ros. Now and then, deep in thought, she’d let out a loud
laugh, but no one ever dared to ask what she was laughing at.
   The only thing we liked about her was a hard, pink bar that looked like
soap. She kept it hidden in her chest of drawers. Once in a while she’d
proudly take it out and let us smell it. The bar gave off the faintest smell of
roses. My father told me that a valley near Kazanlak, Grandmother’s
hometown, was called the ‘Valley of Roses’, and that this miraculous bar
was impregnated with attar of roses from there. A Valley of Roses! The
words alone stirred my imagination. I could not understand how such poetic
places could produce a soul as stern as my grandmother.


1 The Zaporozhian Sich, a loose, semi-autonomous political structure
created by Cossacks on the lower reaches of the river Dnieper, lasted for
several hundred years until it was absorbed into the Russian Empire in
1775.

                              OceanofPDF.com
3
Carp



Stuck   in Gorodishche after the death of my father, I recalled my early
childhood, those times when we, happy and carefree, would come to stay
for the summer from Kiev. Mother and Father were young then, and
Grandfather and his Turkish wife were still alive. I was still just a little boy
and loved to make up all kinds of fanciful tales.
   The train from Kiev arrived in Belaya Tserkov in the evening. Father
hurried out into the station square to hire one of the garrulous drivers. We
reached Gorodishche in the middle of the night. Half asleep I heard the
tiresome jangling of the springs, then the noise of the water near the mill,
and the barking of dogs. The horses snorted. The wattle fences creaked
softly. The endless stars shone in the sky, and out of the damp darkness
came the smell of weeds. Aunt Dozia carried me, half asleep, into the warm
cottage with its coloured rugs spread out over the floor. The cottage smelled
of warm milk. I opened my eyes for a moment and saw in front of me the
rich embroidery on Aunt Dozia’s snow-white sleeves.
   The hot sun beating against the white walls woke me in the morning. Red
and yellow hollyhocks swayed outside the open window. A nasturtium
peeped inside the room; a furry bee had crawled into the flower and become
stuck. I froze and watched as it angrily struggled to back its way out and fly
off. Soft, bright waves of light reflected from the river rippled endlessly
across the ceiling. The river rushed noisily nearby. Then I heard funny
Uncle Ilko’s voice: ‘Well, as usual, the sun’s barely up, but the parade’s
already begun! Dozia, put the cakes and the cherry brandy on the table!’
   I jumped out of bed and ran barefoot to the window. A line of old men in
large straw hats, tapping the ground with their knotty sticks, the medals on
their brown tunics clanking and glistening in the sun, was slowly making its
way over the causeway from the other side of the river. These venerable
elders from the neighbouring village of Pilipchi had come to welcome us
upon our successful arrival. Leading the way with the copper badge of his
office hanging from his neck was the pock-marked Mayor Trofim.
   The cottage sprang to life. Aunt Dozia tossed a cloth over the table,
sending a rush of air through the room. Mama hurriedly piled cakes on the
plates and sliced sausage. Father pulled the corks from the bottles of
homemade cherry brandy, while Uncle Ilko set out the sturdy glass
tumblers. Then Aunt Dozia and Mama ran off to change and Father and
Uncle Ilko went out onto the porch to meet the elders who were
approaching, as solemnly and inevitably as fate itself.
   At last the elders arrived, and, after silently exchanging kisses with my
father and uncle, they sat down on the low stone ledge amid a chorus of
heavy sighs. Then Mayor Trofim, once he had cleared his throat, uttered his
traditional greeting: ‘I have the distinct honour of welcoming you, Georgy
Maximovich, most respectfully to our quiet corner of the country.’
   ‘Thank you!’ said my father.
   ‘Yes-s-s!’ the elders replied immediately, sighing with relief. ‘Yes, of
course, as it should be.’
   ‘Yes-s-s!’ repeated Trofim, peering through the window at the sparkling
bottles on the table.
   ‘That’s the way it is,’ added an old soldier from the era of Tsar Nicholas I
with a crooked nose.
   ‘Quite naturally,’ chimed in a small, curious old man by the name of
Nedolya. He was the father of twelve daughters, but in his old age he had
forgotten most of their names and could only remember five of them by
counting on his fingers: Hannah, Parasya, Gorpyna, Olesya, Frosya . . .
And then here the old man would get confused and have to start all over
again.
   ‘Yes, indeed!’ the elders said and then fell silent for a time.
   At this point Grandfather Maxim Grigorievich came out of the cottage.
The elders got up and bowed down low. Grandfather bowed in return. After
yet another round of loud sighs, the old men sat back down, grunted and
stared silently at the ground. Finally, Uncle Ilko, having read some
mysterious signs imperceptible to the rest of us that the meal was now
ready, said: ‘Well, my good men, thank you for this conversation. And now
let us partake of what God has provided us.’
   Mama, in a fine summer dress, greeted the men inside. Each of them
kissed her hand, and, as was the custom, she kissed theirs, wrinkled and
brown, in return. Beautiful Aunt Dozia, rosy-cheeked and prematurely grey,
wearing a blue dress and a shawl embroidered with crimson flowers, bowed
at the waist.
   After the first glass of the syrupy cherry brandy, Nedolya, tortured with
curiosity, began asking his questions. He was bewildered by the things we
had brought with us from Kiev and, pointing at each one, asked: ‘What’s
this here? What’s it for? What do you say it’s called?’
   Father then explained to him – this here is a brass steam iron, and this is
an ice cream maker, and over there on the commode, that’s a folding mirror.
   Nedolya shook his head with amazement: ‘There’s a tool for everything!’
   ‘Yes, of course, so there is!’ the elders agreed as they drank up.
   Summer came into its own at Gorodishche – hot summers with terrifying
thunderstorms, rustling trees, currents of cool river water, fishing outings,
blackberry picking, and the sweet sensation of carefree days filled with
surprises.
   The island on which Grandfather had built his cottage was, of course, the
most mysterious place in the world. There were two large, deep ponds
behind the house. Their dark waters and the surrounding old willows gave
the place a gloomy feel. On the hill beyond the ponds stood an impenetrable
tangle of nut trees. Beyond the trees stretched several meadows filled with
flowers up to your waist whose fragrance on a sultry day was enough to
give you a headache. Past the meadows a thin trail of smoke rose from
Grandfather’s crude hut by the beehives. And beyond the hut lay
unexplored lands – rocky hills of red granite covered in creeping vines and
wild strawberries. There were small pools of rainwater amid the rocky
hollows. Little wagtails, shaking their bright feathers, drank the warm water
in these pools. Cheeky bumblebees, having clumsily splashed down into the
water, spun around and buzzed, vainly calling for help.
   The rocks ended in a steep cliff above the Ros. We were forbidden from
going this far, but once in a while we crawled out to the edge of the cliff
and looked down. The sight of the torrent of clear water rushing down the
Ros made our heads spin. Just below the surface of the water, skinny fish,
struggling against the current, slowly made their way upstream.
   Spread out along a slope on the far side of the river was the forest
preserve of Countess Branitskaya. The green forest was so thick the sun
could not penetrate it. It was rare when a ray of sunlight managed to break
through the trees to reveal the amazing forest depths. Little birds darted into
the beam like twinkling dust motes. They chirped as they chased each other
and then dived into the leaves as if into green water.
    But the ponds were my favourite place to visit.
    Father went there to fish every morning, and he took me with him. We
went out very early, moving slowly through the heavy, wet grass. Catching
the first light of day, the willow branches shone like tranquil slivers of gold
amid the dark, as yet nocturnal foliage. The carp splashed, disturbing the
quiet water. Clumps of water lilies, knotweed and arrowhead hung as
though suspended somehow above a black abyss.
    This mysterious world of water and weeds opened itself before me. I was
so enchanted by this world that I could have sat on the banks from sunrise
to sunset.
    Father would silently cast his line and light a cigarette. The smoke drifted
over the water and wound through the rushes. I gathered a pail of water
from the pond, threw in a handful of weeds, and waited. Red floats rested
motionless on the surface of the water. Then one of them would begin to
tilt, creating slight ripples, before either diving to the bottom or shooting to
one side. Father hooked a fish, the line tightened, the wooden rod bowed
into an arc and then a thrashing, splashing row erupted in the haze over the
pond. The ripples rocked the lilies and sent the pond skaters scuttling in all
directions, and then, finally, out of the mysterious depths there appeared a
quivering streak of gold. It was impossible to know just what it was until
Father landed the heavy carp on the trampled grass. It lay on its side
gasping for air and moving its fins. The carp’s scales smelled of a
wondrous, underwater realm.
    I dropped the fish in the pail. It thrashed about among the weeds,
smacking its tail all of a sudden and splashing me with water. I licked the
water from my lips and felt a deep urge to drink from the pail, but Father
wouldn’t let me.
    It seemed to me that the water in the pail with the carp and the weeds
tasted as delicious and refreshing as rainwater. We little boys loved to drink
rainwater and we believed it could make you live to the age of one hundred
and twenty. At least that’s what Nechipor always said.

                              OceanofPDF.com
4
Pleurisy



Thunderstorms at Gorodishche were common. They began on the peasant
festival of Ivan Kupala and lasted all July. They besieged the island with
enormous multi-coloured clouds, which flashed and crashed, shaking the
house and frightening Aunt Dozia half to death.
   These storms are connected with the memory of my first childhood love
affair. I was nine years old at the time. On the festival of Ivan Kupala the
girls from Pilipchi arrived on the island in their finest dresses like a brightly
feathered flock of birds to float wreaths down the river. They wove the
wreaths out of wild flowers. In the centre of each wreath, they affixed a
wooden crosspiece which held a wax candle-end. The girls lit the candles at
dusk and then released the wreaths into the river. The candles told the girls’
fortunes – the one whose candle was the last to go out would know the most
happiness. But the most fortunate of all were the girls whose wreaths drifted
into the whirlpool and slowly spun around and around in the eddy just
before the rapids. The air here was still and the flame would burn with
unusual intensity such that you could even hear the wick crackle from the
banks.
   Everyone – children and grown-ups – loved these wreaths on Ivan
Kupala Day. Nechipor alone grunted dismissively and liked to say: ‘Bunch
of nonsense! Those wreaths are pointless!’
   Hannah, a distant cousin, came with the girls. She was sixteen. She
braided orange and black ribbons in her thick reddish plaits. Around her
neck hung a necklace of dull coral. Hannah had sparkling, greenish eyes.
Every time Hannah smiled, she lowered her eyes and then raised them
slowly as if they were too heavy to lift. Her cheeks were always burning
red. I used to hear Mama and Aunt Dozia speaking of Hannah with pity. I
wanted to know why, but they always fell silent as soon as I approached.
   One Ivan Kupala Day I went down to the river with Hannah to see the
girls. On the way she asked: ‘Kostik, what are you going to be when you
grow up?’
   ‘A sailor,’ I answered.
   ‘Oh no, don’t do that!’ said Hannah. ‘Sailors drown out at sea. Someone
will then cry their eyes out over you.’
   I didn’t pay any attention to what Hannah said. I held her hot, suntanned
hand in mine and told her about my first trip to the sea.
   Early that spring my father had taken me with him to Novorossiisk on a
three-day business trip. The sea appeared to be far off, like a blue wall. For
a long time I couldn’t tell what it was. Then I caught sight of the green bay
and the lighthouse and heard the sound of the breakers, and the sea filled
me like the memory of a confused but magnificent dream. Two black
battleships with yellow funnels sat anchored in the harbour: the Twelve
Apostles and the Three Bishops. My father and I visited the ships. I was
amazed by the sunburned officers, with their white uniforms and gold-hilted
daggers, and by the oily warmth of the engine room. But I was most
amazed by my father. I had never seen him like this before. He laughed, he
joked and he carried on lively conversations with the officers. We even
visited one of the ship’s engineers in his cabin. The two men drank cognac
together and smoked pink Turkish cigarettes with gold Arabic lettering on
them.
   Hannah listened with her head lowered. For some reason I felt bad for
her, and I said that when I became a sailor, I would immediately take her
with me aboard my ship.
   ‘As what?’ Hannah asked. ‘The ship’s cook or the laundress?’
   ‘No!’ I answered, fired by my schoolboy enthusiasm. ‘You’ll be my
wife.’
   Hannah stopped and looked me square in the eyes. ‘Promise!’ she
whispered. ‘Swear on it in your mother’s name!’
   ‘I swear!’ I answered, not even thinking what I was saying.
   Hannah smiled, her eyes turned as green as seawater, and she gave me a
big kiss on the forehead. Her lips were hot. Neither of us said a word the
rest of the way to the river.
   Hannah’s candle was the first to go out. A massive dark storm cloud had
appeared over Countess Branitskaya’s forest, but, distracted by the wreaths,
we did not notice it until the wind struck, thrashing the reeds and bending
them to the ground, and the first flash of lightning lit the sky in a blinding
explosion of thunder. The girls ran screaming into the woods. Hannah tore
the shawl from her shoulders, wrapped it around me, grabbed my hand, and
off we ran. She dragged me behind her, but the downpour was catching up
with us and I knew there was no way we’d ever make it home in time.
   The downpour hit us near Grandfather’s hut. We were soaked through by
the time we got there. Grandfather wasn’t there. We sat in the hut, clinging
to each other. Hannah dried my hands. She smelled of damp calico. She
kept asking in a frightened voice: ‘Are you cold? Oh, what will I do if you
get sick?’
   I was shivering. I truly was cold. The look in Hannah’s eyes went from
fear, to despair, to love. She clutched her throat and began coughing. I saw a
vein on her neck bulge beneath her smooth, clear skin. I flung my arms
around Hannah and buried my head in her wet shoulder. All of a sudden, I
wished that my mother were as young and kind as Hannah.
   ‘What’s wrong?’ she asked, confused and still coughing as she stroked
my head. ‘What is it? Don’t be frightened . . . The thunder can’t hurt us. I’m
right here. Don’t be frightened.’
   Then she gently pushed me away and pressed her mouth to her sleeve,
which was embroidered with red oak leaves. When she took her mouth
away, I saw a small patch of blood, similar in shape to those leaves,
splattered on her sleeve.
   ‘I don’t need your oath!’ she whispered, looking up at me with a guilty
smile. ‘I was only kidding.’
   The thunder had moved off. The downpour had passed. There was
nothing now but the sound of rain dripping from the trees. That night, I
caught a fever. The next day young Dr Napelbaum rode out on his bicycle
from Belaya Tserkov. He examined me and said I had pleurisy. Napelbaum
left us to see Hannah in Pilipchi. When he returned, I overheard him talking
in a low voice to my mother in the next room: ‘Maria Grigorievna, the girl
has galloping consumption. She’ll be dead by spring.’
   I burst into tears and shouted for Mama. I threw my arms around her, and
at that moment I noticed she had the same sweet vein as Hannah. Then I
cried even harder and for a long time couldn’t stop. Mama stroked my head
and said: ‘What is it? I’m right here. Don’t be frightened.’
   I got better, but Hannah died that winter, in February.
  Mama and I went to visit her grave the following summer. I placed a
bunch of daisies tied with a black ribbon on the small grassy mound.
Hannah used to tuck daisies into her plaits. For some reason I felt
uncomfortable standing there next to Mama with her red parasol. I should
have come alone.

                           OceanofPDF.com
5
A Trip to Chenstokhov



My other grandmother, Vikentia Ivanovna, a tall, old Polish woman, lived
in Cherkassy on the river Dnieper. She had many daughters, my aunts. One
of these aunts, Yevfrosinia Grigorievna, was the headmistress of a girls’
school in Cherkassy. My grandmother lived with this aunt in a large
wooden house. Vikentia Ivanovna always went around in mourning and a
headdress. She first began to wear mourning clothes after the suppression of
the Polish Rebellion of 1863 and from that day on never took them off. We
were convinced that during the rebellion Grandmother’s fiancé had been
killed. He must have been a proud Polish revolutionary, not at all like
Grandmother’s morose husband, our grandfather, a retired notary public in
Cherkassy.
   I remember my grandfather poorly. He lived on a small mezzanine and
rarely came downstairs. Grandmother sent him off to live there away from
all the others given his intolerable smoking habit. Once in a while we’d go
and visit him in his room, smelly and dense with smoke. On the table were
great piles of tobacco that had spilled out of various pouches. Our
grandfather, seated in his chair, would roll cigarette after cigarette with his
shaking, gnarled hands. He didn’t talk to us but would ruffle the hair on the
back of our heads and give us the shiny purple paper off his tobacco
pouches.
   We often came to visit Vikentia Ivanovna from Kiev. She had one strict
habit. Every spring during Lent she undertook a pilgrimage to Catholic holy
sites either in Warsaw, Vilnius or Chenstokhov. Sometimes she took it into
her head to visit Orthodox shrines and would go to the Holy Trinity
Monastery of St Sergius or to Pochaev. Her sons and daughters all laughed
at her and said that if she kept this up, Vikentia Ivanovna would start paying
visits to Jewish tsaddiks and end her days with a pilgrimage to
Mohammed’s tomb in Mecca.
   The biggest argument my father ever had with my grandmother was
when she used the occasion of his travelling to Vienna for a convention of
statisticians to take me with her on one of these religious journeys. I was
happy to go and did not understand my father’s indignation. I was eight at
the time. I remember the bright spring air in Vilnius and the chapel at the
‘Gate of Dawn’ where grandmother went to Mass. The whole town
glistened with the pale green and goldish brilliance of the new leaves. At
noon a cannon from the Napoleonic era fired a salute from atop Castle Hill.
   Grandmother was an extremely well-read woman, and she was forever
explaining things to me. She had a remarkable way of combining her
religiosity with progressive ideas. She was infatuated with Herzen and at
the same time with Henryk Sienkiewicz.1 In her bedroom portraits of
Pushkin and Mickiewicz hung side-by-side with an icon of Our Lady of
Chenstokhov. During the pogroms of the revolution of 1905, she hid
revolutionary students and Jews in her home.
   From Vilnius we left for Warsaw. I only recall the Copernicus monument
and the cafés where grandmother treated me to ‘upside-down-coffee’ –
more milk than coffee. She also treated me to meringues, which melted in
my mouth with creamy cool sweetness. We were served by fidgety
waitresses in pleated aprons. From Warsaw we travelled on to Chenstokhov
and the famous Catholic monastery of Jasna Góra with its ‘miracle-
working’ Black Madonna icon. This was my first encounter with religious
fanaticism. It shocked and frightened me. Ever since I have been filled with
fear and revulsion for fanaticism. For a long time, I could not lose the fear I
felt that day.
   Our train arrived in Chenstokhov early in the morning. It was far from
the station to the monastery, which stood on a large green hill. The pilgrims
– Polish peasants, men and women – exited the train, along with some city
dwellers, all in sooty bowler hats. A portly old priest and some young
deacons in lacy garments were waiting for the pilgrims at the station. The
procession of pilgrims gathered on the dusty road in front of the station.
The priest blessed them and muttered a prayer. The crowd dropped to its
knees and began to crawl towards the monastery, chanting psalms as they
went.
   The throng crawled all the way to the cathedral. Taking the lead was a
grey-haired woman with a white, ecstatic face. In her hand she held a black
wooden crucifix. Ahead of them all the priest walked slowly and
indifferently. It was hot and dusty, sweat was running down their faces.
They panted and wheezed and shot reproachful glances at the pilgrims who
were falling behind. I grabbed my grandmother by the hand.
   ‘Why are they doing this?’ I whispered.
   ‘Don’t be afraid,’ Grandmother answered in Polish. ‘They’re penitents
seeking forgiveness for their sins from Our Lord God.’
   ‘Let’s leave,’ I said to my grandmother, but she pretended not to hear me.
   The monastery at Chenstokhov was a medieval castle. Rusty Swedish
cannonballs were embedded in its walls, and mucky green water filled the
moats. Large, thick trees rustled on the ramparts. The drawbridges had been
lowered on their metal chains. We drove across one of them in a droshky
into a tangle of courtyards, back streets and alleyways. A lay brother, a cord
around his waist, led us to the monastery hotel. We were shown to a cold
room with a vaulted ceiling. The inevitable crucifix hung on the wall.
Someone had affixed a garland of paper flowers to the nails on Christ’s
brass feet. The monk asked my grandmother whether she didn’t happen to
be suffering from any illnesses requiring a cure. Grandmother had always
been quite anxious about her health, and she immediately complained to
him of heart pains. From the pocket of his brown habit the monk took out a
handful of small silver hearts, arms, heads and even tiny babies and poured
them in a heap on the table.
   ‘We have hearts’, he said, ‘for five, ten and twenty roubles. They have
already been blessed. All you have to do is say a prayer and hang them on
the icon of Our Lady.’
   Grandmother bought a small plump heart for ten roubles. She told me
that we were going to go to Solemn Mass that night at the monastery
church, treated me to tea and stale buns from Warsaw, and then lay down to
rest. She quickly fell asleep. I looked out of the small window. A monk in a
magnificent but faded habit walked past. Then two Polish peasants sat
down in the shadow of the wall, took some plain bread and garlic out of
their bundles, and began to eat. They had blue eyes and big, strong teeth.
   I got bored, so I quietly went out into the street. My grand mother had
instructed me not to speak Russian inside the monastery. This scared me
since I only knew a few words of Polish. I got lost and ended up in a narrow
passage between two walls. The ground was covered with cracked tiles, out
of which grew a single plantain. There were cast-iron lanterns along the
walls that had not been lit in a long time – I spied a bird’s nest in one of
them. A narrow gate in one of the walls stood half open. I looked inside. An
apple orchard, bathed in pools of sunlight, stretched out across the slope of
a hill. I hesitated and then went inside. The orchard was shedding its
blossoms. Yellowed petals were falling. A faint but melodic ringing came
from the church belfry.
   A young Polish peasant sat nursing her infant under an old apple tree.
The baby wrinkled his face and wheezed. Next to the woman stood a pale,
puffy peasant youth in a new felt hat. A blue satin ribbon had been sewn to
the hat and a peacock feather stuck into it. The young lad stared down at his
feet with big round eyes and did not move. A short, bald-headed monk with
gardening shears in his hand sat down on a tree stump across from the
woman. He fixed his eyes on me and said, ‘Praised be Our Lord Jesus
Christ!’
   ‘For ever and ever!’ I replied, just as my grandmother had taught me. My
heart stopped from fright.
   The monk turned around and began listening to the woman. Strands of
her blond hair kept falling in her face, and she was brushing them back
gently and complaining: ‘When our son was four months old, Michas´ shot
a stork and brought it into our little house. I cried and said: “What’ve you
done, you fool? Don’t you know that for every stork that’s killed, God takes
a baby? Why’d you shoot it, Michaś?”’
   The youth in the felt hat went on staring at the ground.
   ‘And since that day,’ she continued, ‘our dear son has gone blue in the
face and has trouble breathing. Will Our Lady help him?’
   The monk looked away awkwardly and said nothing.
   ‘Oh, what misery!’ said the woman and began clawing at her throat, ‘Oh,
what misery!’ she wailed, pressing the baby to her breast.
   The baby wheezed and its eyes bulged. I remembered the toy silver
babies that the lay brother had shown Grandmother back at the hotel. I felt
sorry for the woman. I wanted to tell her to buy one of those babies for
twenty roubles and hang it on the icon of Our Lady of Chenstokhov, but I
didn’t know enough Polish to give her this complicated piece of advice.
What’s more, I was afraid of the monk, and so I left the orchard. When I got
back, Grandmother was still sleeping. I lay down on the hard bed without
taking off my clothes and fell fast asleep. Grandmother woke me in the
middle of the night. I washed with cold water in a large faience hand-basin.
The shock of the water made me shiver. Outside our windows hand-held
lanterns floated by, feet shuffled and the bells called.
   ‘The cardinal is holding Mass tonight,’ Grandmother said. ‘He’s the
papal nuncio.’
   It was difficult to find our way in the dark, but eventually we reached the
church. ‘Hold onto me,’ said Grandmother in the unlit vestibule. We groped
our way into the church. I couldn’t see a thing. There wasn’t a single
candle, not the faintest glint of light amid the close gloom entombed within
the high church walls. In this utter darkness I could hear the breathing of
hundreds of people; there was the slightly sweet smell of flowers. I felt the
worn iron floor underfoot, took a step, and immediately bumped into
something.
   ‘Be still!’ Grandmother whispered. ‘There are people lying on the floor.
You’ll step on them.’ She began to say a prayer, and I stood waiting,
holding onto her elbow. I was terrified. The people on the floor lay with
their arms stretched out in the shape of the cross and were breathing softly.
The air was filled with a doleful rustling.
   Suddenly, the organ thundered to life, piercing the heavy darkness and
shaking the walls. At that very moment hundreds of candles burst into
flame. I screamed, blinded and frightened. The large gold curtain covering
the icon of Our Lady of Chenstokhov slowly began to part. Six old priests
in lacy vestments knelt before the icon with their backs to the crowd, their
arms raised up to the heavens. Only the bony cardinal, in his purple cassock
with its wide violet sash drawn up about his thin waist, was standing
upright, also with his back to the praying crowd, as if listening to the dying
storm of the organ and the sobs of the throng. I have never since witnessed
such a theatrical or incomprehensible spectacle.
   After the service Grandmother and I left and entered a long vaulted
passageway. It began to grow light. People knelt in prayer along the walls.
Grandmother also knelt and made me kneel too. I was afraid to ask her what
these wild-eyed people were waiting for. Then the cardinal appeared at the
end of the corridor. He walked swiftly with light steps in our direction. His
cassock billowed as he went, brushing the faces of those kneeling in prayer.
They grabbed at the edges of his cassock, kissing it with passion and
humility.
   ‘Kiss his cassock,’ my grandmother hurriedly whispered. But I refused. I
blanched and begrudgingly stared the cardinal in the face. There must have
been tears in my eyes, for he stopped, touched me briefly on the head with a
small, dry hand, and said in Polish: ‘A child’s tears are the best prayer to the
Lord.’
   I looked at him. Brown skin was stretched tightly over his pointy face,
which appeared to be lit by a dim glow. His black eyes narrowed and
focused on me expectantly. I remained stubbornly silent. The cardinal
turned round sharply and swept on as lightly as before, stirring the air as he
went. Grandmother grabbed me by the arm with such force I nearly cried in
pain and led me out of the corridor.
   ‘Just like your father!’ she said once we had reached the courtyard. ‘Just
like your father! Oh, dear Mother of God! Whatever is to become of you?’


1 Henryk Sienkiewicz (1846–1916), Polish novelist and journalist, winner
of the Nobel Prize in Literature (1905).

                              OceanofPDF.com
6
Pink Oleanders



My grandmother always kept oleanders in green tubs on the verandah of
her home in Cherkassy. They had pink petals. I liked their greyish leaves
and pale flowers very much. For some reason I associated them with the sea
– a distant, warm sea bathing the shores of a land that blossomed with
oleanders. Grandmother had a way with flowers. Her bedroom in the winter
months was always overflowing with fuchsias. In the summer the garden
exploded with flowers, taking on the appearance of a giant bouquet, and
burdock crowded the fences. The scent of all those flowers made its way
inside to Grandfather’s room on the mezzanine and drove out the tobacco
fug. Grandfather would angrily slam the windows shut. He liked to say that
the flowers aggravated his chronic asthma.
   At the time I imagined the flowers to be living beings. Mignonette was a
poor girl in a darned, grey dress, but her remarkable scent gave away her
fairytale lineage. The yellow tea-roses were young beauties who had lost
their rosy cheeks from drinking too much tea. The bed with pansies looked
like a masked ball. These were not flowers, but happy and playful Gypsies
in black velvet masks, florid dancers – now blue, now purple, now yellow. I
didn’t like the daisies. With their faded pink dresses, they reminded me of
the little daughters of the schoolmaster Zimmer, my grandmother’s
neighbour. The girls were tow-headed and had no eyebrows. Every time
you met them, they would curtsy, their fingers daintily touching the edge of
their skirts. The most interesting flower was, of course, the purslane – a
creeper covered with the purest colours. Instead of leaves the purslane had
soft, juicy needles. If you gave them a slight squeeze, they’d spray green
juice in your face.
   Grandmother’s garden and all the flowers in it acted on my imagination
with uncommon force. My passion for travel must have been born in that
garden as well. In my childhood I used to imagine a faraway country that I
was certain to visit. It was a hilly plain covered as far as the horizon with
grass and flowers and hidden in among them were villages and towns.
When express trains crossed the plain, thick pollen would cover the sides of
the carriages. I would tell this to my brothers, sister and Mama, but no one
cared to understand me. Rather, when he first heard this, my elder brother
called me a ‘dreamer’, a contemptuous nickname that stuck.
   Perhaps the only person who understood me was my Aunt Nadya, the
youngest of my grandmother’s daughters. She was twenty-three at the time
and studying singing at the Moscow Conservatory. She had a beautiful
contralto voice. She would come to Grandmother’s in Cherkassy for Easter
and the summer. The quiet, spacious house became noisy and crowded as
soon as she arrived. Slender and graceful, with tousled fair hair and fresh
lips parted ever so slightly, she played with us and rushed headlong up and
down the polished floors, laughing as she went. Flecks of gold sparkled in
her grey eyes. These eyes responded to everything with a laugh: to any
joke, joyful word, even to Anton the tomcat, who looked upon our games
disapprovingly with a most critical expression.
   ‘It’s all fun and games for Aunt Nadya!’ Mama liked to say, with mild
criticism. Her happy-go-lucky nature was proverbial in our family, and she
was always losing things – her gloves, her powder, her money – but she
never let anything upset her. We opened up the piano the day she arrived,
and it remained open until Aunt Nadya left for her cheerful, hospitable
Moscow. Piles of sheet music littered the chairs. The candles smoked. The
piano rumbled, and sometimes at night I awoke to the sound of her deep yet
delicate voice singing a barcarolle: ‘Sail, my gondola, lit by the moon. Ring
out, barcarolle, over the slumberous waves.’
   And in the morning, I was awakened by an ingratiating voice, almost a
whisper, by my ear, and Aunt Nadya’s hair tickling my cheeks as she sang:
‘It’s time to get up, it’s no time to slumber, your eyes closed, having
abandoned yourself to your reveries. The robins have been calling for some
time, and for you the roses have opened up!’
   I opened my eyes, she kissed me, and then suddenly disappeared, yet a
moment later I could hear how she and her brother, Uncle Kolya, a cadet,
were twirling through the hall in a rushing waltz. He too sometimes came to
visit my grandmother from St Petersburg for Easter. Then I would hop out
of bed, sensing that the day was going to be wild, cheerful and full of
surprises. When Aunt Nadya sang, even Grandfather up on the mezzanine
opened his door to the stairs and would later say to my grandmother:
‘Where on earth did Nadya get her Gypsy blood?’
   My grandmother would assure him that Nadya’s blood wasn’t Gypsy, but
Polish. Citing examples from literature and the early history of Poland, she
showed him that Polish women were often uncontrollably cheerful,
whimsical and carefree.
   ‘Exactly!’ my grandfather answered caustically and then slammed the
door shut. ‘Exactly!’ he repeated loudly behind the closed door, sitting
down to roll a cigarette.
   I recall one year when Easter came late and the gardens in Cherkassy
were already in bloom. We arrived by steamboat from Kiev, followed by
Aunt Nadya from Moscow. I loved Easter but not the days leading up to it
because I was forced to grind almonds and beat egg whites with a spoon. I
found this exhausting and would quietly cry to myself. Also, Grandmother’s
house was thrown into disorder before Easter. Women with their skirts
tucked up were busy washing the ficus plants, rhododendrons, the windows
and floors, they beat the rugs and the furniture, they polished all the brass
handles and fittings on the doors and windows. And they forever chased us
from one room to another.
   After the cleaning came the solemn rite – Grandmother made the dough
for the Easter cakes or, as our family called them, ‘satin cakes’. A quilt was
laid over the tub filled with bubbling yellow dough, and until the dough had
risen, no one was allowed to run around, slam the doors or even speak in a
raised voice. A cab driving by the house filled my grandmother with horror:
the slightest shaking could cause the dough to ‘sink’, and then goodbye to
the tall, spongy cakes smelling of saffron and covered with sugary icing.
   Along with the cakes, my grandmother also baked a number of different
biscuits with raisins and almonds that we called ‘mazurkas’. When the
baking tins with the hot mazurkas came out of the oven, such delicious
smells wafted through the house that even Grandfather in his mezzanine
would get all worked up. He would open the door and peer down into the
drawing room at the long marble table already covered with heavy
tablecloths. With Holy Sunday, a cool cleanliness and calm finally reigned
in the house. In the morning we were given a cup of weak tea with sugar
and rusks, and we did not eat another thing until after matins the following
day. We liked this short-lived hunger. The day seemed very long, we felt a
faint ringing in our ears, and Grandmother’s insistence that we stop talking
so much put us in a solemn mood. At midnight we left for matins. They
dressed me in long sailor’s trousers and a jacket with brass buttons and
brushed my hair so hard it hurt. Looking at myself in the mirror, I saw a
terribly excited and flushed little boy and was very pleased.
   Aunt Yevfrosinia Grigorievna came out of her rooms. She was the only
one who did not take part in the Easter preparations. She was always ill,
spoke very little, and did nothing but gently smile at our cheerful banter.
She wore a drab blue dress with a gold watch chain around her neck and a
pretty bow on her shoulder. Mama explained to me that the bow was called
a ‘cipher’ and had been awarded to Aunt Yevfrosinia Grigorievna for
graduating with high honours from the institute she had once attended.
   Mama wore her special grey dress, and Father his black suit and white
waistcoat. Then Grandmother would make her grand appearance – beautiful
and all in black silk with an artificial heliotrope pinned to her corsage. Her
smooth dress rustled as she walked along so lightly – Grandmother became
younger on those nights. She lit the lamps before the icons and then pulled
on her black lace gloves and Father held out her mantle with its black
ribbon ties.
   ‘You’re not coming to Mass, I take it?’ Grandmother asked him with
chilly politeness.
   ‘No, Vikentia Ivanovna,’ Father replied with a smile. ‘I think I’ll lie
down for a while. They’ll wake me when you’re back from church.’
   ‘Oh,’ said my grandmother and shook her shoulders, adjusting her
mantle. ‘My only hope is that God has had enough of your jokes and has
given up on you as a lost cause.’
   ‘I’m also counting on that very much,’ Father answered politely.
   Grandmother went upstairs for a moment to say goodbye to Grandfather.
When she came back down, Aunt Nadya, who was always late, appeared in
the hall. She didn’t so much walk as fly, just like a petite, shimmering bird,
in her white silk dress with a train and puffed sleeves. She was breathing
heavily, and the yellow rose on her breast fluttered. It seemed as if all the
light and joy of the world were shining in her eyes. Grandmother stopped
on the stairs to put her handkerchief to her eyes. She could not hold back
the tears at the sight of her youngest daughter’s beauty. It was clear she
thought about Aunt Nadya’s fate, about what would become of her in this
harsh world, and these thoughts could not keep my grandmother from
crying. When we returned from church this time, Father was not asleep. He
had opened the windows of the drawing room that looked out onto the
garden. It was very warm.
   We sat down at the table to break the fast. The night hovered all around
us. The stars shone straight into our eyes. From the garden came the
twittering of a bird. We spoke little and everyone listened to the rising and
falling sound of the bells in the darkness. Aunt Nadya sat pale and tired. I
had seen that my father had handed her a blue telegram in the entrance hall
while helping her off with her cloak. She had blushed and crushed the
telegram in her hand. After we had eaten, I was sent straight to bed. I awoke
late to the clinking of cups in the dining room where the adults were already
drinking coffee. At dinner Aunt Nadya said that she had received a telegram
from her friend Liza Yavorskaya in the neighbouring town of Smela. Liza
had invited Aunt Nadya to come and spend the day with her at her home
near Smela.
   ‘I want to go tomorrow,’ said Aunt Nadya, looking at Grandmother, and
then added: ‘And take Kostik with me.’ I blushed with joy.
   ‘All right,’ Grandmother replied, ‘go, but take care you don’t both catch
cold.’
   ‘They’re sending horses for us,’ said Aunt Nadya.
   It was an hour’s ride on the train from Cherkassy to Smela. Liza
Yavorskaya, a plump and cheerful young lady, met us at the station in
Smela. In a carriage and pair we drove through the clean and pretty little
town. The river Tyasmin had overflowed its banks at the foot of some steep
green hills, its slow current swirling with quiet eddies that appeared silver
in the light. It was hot. Dragonflies flew over the river. We drove through a
lonely park outside town and Liza Yavorskaya said that Pushkin had loved
to go for walks here. I couldn’t believe that Pushkin had visited these places
and that I was now where he had been. At that time Pushkin seemed to me
to be a purely legendary being. There was no way his spectacular life could
have had any connection to this Ukrainian backwater.
   ‘The Raevskys’ old estate, Kamenka, is nearby,’ said Liza Yavorskaya.
‘He stayed with them for a long time and wrote a marvellous poem there.’
   ‘Which one?’ asked Aunt Nadya.
   ‘Play, know no sorrow, Adele, / For you’ve been crowned by the Charites
and Lel, / ’Twas they who rocked your cradle so well . . .’
   I did not understand what ‘the Charites’ or ‘Lel’ meant,1 but the music
and power of these verses, the expansive park, the ancient lime trees, and
the sky with its drifting clouds – all combined to put me in a magical mood.
The whole day remained in my memory as a quiet and lonely celebration of
spring. Liza Yavorskaya got the carriage to stop in a broad allée. We got out
and went up to a house on a path lined on either side with dog-rose.
Suddenly, at a turn in the path, out popped a well-tanned, bearded man
without a hat. He had a double-barrelled shotgun over his shoulder, and in
his hand he carried two dead ducks. His jacket was undone, exposing his
strong, brown neck. Aunt Nadya stopped, and I saw that she had gone very
pale.
   The tanned man broke off a large branch of dog-rose covered in small
thorns, bloodying his hands, and handed it to Aunt Nadya. She carefully
took the spiky rose and extended her hand to the old man, and he kissed it.
   ‘Your hair reeks of gunpowder,’ said Aunt Nadya. ‘And your hands are
all cut up. You must have the thorns removed.’
   ‘It’s nothing!’ he said and smiled. He had nice, straight teeth. Now, close
up, I noticed he was not an old man at all. We made our way to the house.
The bearded man talked most strangely, about everything all at once – about
how he had arrived from Moscow two days ago, how wonderful this place
was, how the day after tomorrow he had to take his paintings to an
exhibition in Venice, how he’d been bewitched by a Gypsy – a model of the
artist Vrubel2 – and how he was a lost soul who could be saved only by the
voice of Aunt Nadya. Aunt Nadya was smiling. I watched him. I liked him
very much. I guessed he was an artist. He really did smell of gunpowder.
His hands were covered in pine sap. Now and then bright blood dripped
from the ducks’ black bills onto the path. The artist had cobwebs stuck in
his thick hair, along with some pine needles and even a dry twig. Aunt
Nadya took him by the arm, made him stop and pulled out the twig.
   ‘You’re hopeless!’ she said. ‘Just a little boy,’ she added, smiling sadly.
   ‘Try to understand,’ he mumbled in a begging voice, ‘it was wonderful! I
forced my way through a young pine forest, and yes, I got all torn up, but
what smells, what dry white pinks, what red pine needles, and what a
spider’s web! Such delights!’
   ‘And that’s why I love you,’ Aunt Nadya said softly.
   Suddenly, the artist took the gun from his shoulder and fired both barrels
into the air. Bluish smoke swirled from the end of the gun. Dogs began
barking and running towards us. A frightened hen could be heard
squawking.
   ‘A salute to life!’ said the artist. ‘It’s a hell of a marvellous thing to be
alive!’
   We made our way to the house with the excited dogs barking around us.
The house was white with columns and striped curtains covering the
windows. A little old lady – Liza Yavorskaya’s mother – came out to greet
us in a pale mauve dress and holding a lorgnette, her hair a pile of grey
curls. She screwed up her eyes and, clasping her hands, extolled Aunt
Nadya’s beauty at length. A breeze blew through the cool rooms, tugging at
the curtains and sweeping copies of The Russian Word and Kievan Thought
off the table. The dogs wandered about, sniffing here and there. All of a
sudden, they heard some suspicious noises coming from the park and raced
outside, yelping loudly and falling all over each other as they went.
   Patches of sunlight, chased from room to room by the breeze, picked out
things along the way – vases, the brass castors on the piano legs, gilt picture
frames, the straw hat Aunt Nadya had tossed onto the windowsill. We drank
strong coffee in the dining room. The artist told me about how he had
caught a fish in the centre of Paris on the embankment across from Notre-
Dame. Aunt Nadya watched him, a gentle, amused smile on her face, and
Liza’s mother kept repeating: ‘Oh, Sasha! When will you finally grow up?
It’s high time already!’
   After our coffee the artist took Aunt Nadya and me by the hand and led
us to his room. Brushes and squeezed paint tubes lay all about. An air of
total disorder reigned in the room. He quickly gathered up some dirty shirts,
boots and bits of canvas, shoved them under the sofa, then filled his pipe
with oily tobacco from a blue tin, lit it, and ordered Aunt Nadya and me to
sit down on the window-sill. We sat down as ordered. The sun was very
warm on our backs. The artist went up to a picture on the wall covered by a
cloth and removed it. There it is,’ he mumbled in an embarrassed voice.
‘I’ve managed to botch every last bit of it.’
   It was a portrait of Aunt Nadya. Back then I didn’t know a thing about
painting. I had overheard my father and Uncle Kolya arguing about
Vereshchagin3 and Vrubel, but I’d never seen a good picture in my life. The
ones at my grandmother’s house were gloomy landscapes with dull trees
and stags beside a stream or still-lifes of dead ducks hanging upside down.
When the artist revealed the portrait I couldn’t help laughing from sheer
delight – the portrait captured the essence of Aunt Nadya’s springtime
beauty, and also the golden cascade of sunshine that poured down into the
old park, the breeze wafting through the rooms and the greenish reflection
of the leaves. Aunt Nadya looked at the portrait for a long time, then she
playfully ruffled the artist’s hair and hastened out of the room without
saying a word.
   ‘Well, thank God!’ the artist sighed. ‘That means I can take the work to
the exhibition in Venice.’
   That afternoon we went for a boat ride on the Tyasmin. A green
crenellated wall, the shadow cast by the trees in the park, lay on the water.
In the depths the round leaves of young water lilies could be seen straining
to reach the surface. In the evening, before we left, Aunt Nadya sang in the
cosy music room, accompanied by the artist, whose fingers, still smeared
with pine sap, kept sticking to the piano keys: First meetings, last meetings,
the dear sound of a beloved’s voice . . .
   Then we drove back to Smela in a carriage and pair, along with the artist
and Liza. The horses’ hooves clanged on the hard road. From the river came
a damp breeze and the croaking of frogs. High overhead, a single star
burned in the sky. At the station Liza took me to the buffet to get ice cream
while the artist and Aunt Nadya sat down on a bench in the little garden out
front. The buffet didn’t have any ice cream, of course, and when we
returned, Aunt Nadya and the artist were still sitting on the bench, lost in
thought.
   Soon after this Aunt Nadya left for Moscow, and I never saw her again.
At Shrovetide the following year, she sang in an open troika while riding to
Petrovsky Park and caught a chill that soon developed into pneumonia. She
died just before Easter. My grandmother, mother and even my father went
to her funeral. I missed her terribly, and to this day I cannot forget Aunt
Nadya. She has always remained for me the embodiment of feminine youth,
warmth and happiness.


1   ‘Lel’ refers to mythical Slavic pagan goddesses of love or marriage.
2  Mikhail Vrubel (1856–1910), painter and sculptor particularly
remembered for his series of ‘Demon’ paintings.
3 Vasily Vereshchagin (1842–1904), realist painter well known for his
depictions of war.
OceanofPDF.com
7
Elderwood Balls



Small, soft white balls rolled around inside a box. I would drop one into a
bowl of water. The ball would begin to swell, and then open up and
transform itself into either a black elephant with red eyes or an orange
dragon or a rose with green leaves. These magical Chinese balls made of
elderwood had been a gift from my godfather and uncle, Iosif Grigorievich,
or, simply, Uncle Yuzia, who’d brought them from Peking.
   ‘An adventurer, pure and simple!’ Father would say of him, although not
with disapproval, but in fact a touch of envy. He envied Uncle Yuzia
because he had travelled all over Africa, Asia and Europe, and not as some
well-behaved tourist, but as a crusader, noisy, rowdy, insolently daring, and
with an unquenchable thirst for every improbable kind of affair in any
corner of the globe: from Shanghai to Addis Ababa, from Harbin to
Mashhad. All these affairs had ended in failure.
   ‘I should stake a claim in the Klondike,’ Uncle Yuzia liked to say. ‘I’d
show those Americans a thing or two.’
   Just what it was exactly he was going to show those inveterate gold
prospectors in the Klondike remained unclear. But it was perfectly obvious
that he would have shown them something so stupendous that his fame
would resound all across the Yukon and Alaska. Perhaps he had been born
to be a famous explorer or discoverer like Nikolai Przhevalsky1 or
Livingstone. But life in Russia back then in those days – what my father
called ‘untimely’ – had ruined Uncle Yuzia. His noble passion for travel
became in the end a haphazard and fruitless wandering. All the same, I am
indebted to Uncle Yuzia, for his stories made the world a desperately
interesting subject for me, and I have kept this feeling my whole life.
Grandmother Vikentia Ivanovna regarded Uncle Yuzia as a form of ‘divine
retribution’ and the black sheep of the family. When she was angry at me
for some prank or being naughty, she’d say: ‘Mind yourself or you’ll turn
out to be a second Uncle Yuzia!’
   My poor grandmother! She had no idea that my uncle’s life seemed to me
utterly splendid. My sole dream was to become ‘a second Uncle Yuzia’.
Uncle Yuzia always turned up unexpectedly at our home in Kiev or at our
grandmother’s in Cherkassy only to disappear just as unexpectedly, and
then reappear in a year or eighteen months with his deafening ring at our
door and fill the flat with his hoarse voice, his coughing, swearing and
infectious laughter. And every time right behind Uncle Yuzia would be the
cab driver dragging heavy trunks across the floor filled with all sorts of
treasures.
   Uncle Yuzia was a tall, bearded man with a broken nose, hands of steel –
he could bend silver roubles – and suspiciously calm eyes, in whose depths
always lurked a glint of cunning. As my father would say, ‘He has no fear
of God, Satan or death,’ although he’d go all to pieces at the sight of a
woman’s tears or when confronted by a capricious child. The first time I
ever saw him was after the Boer War. Uncle Yuzia had joined the Boers as a
volunteer. This heroic and unselfish act had greatly raised his stock among
all the relatives.
   All of us children were shocked by this war. We felt sorry for the Boers
fighting for their independence and hated the English. We knew the details
of every battle fought on the other side of the earth – the siege of
Ladysmith, the clash at Bloemfontein, the assault on Diamond Hill. Our
heroes were the Boer generals De Wet, Joubert and Botha. We despised the
haughty Lord Kitchener and laughed at the English soldiers in their red
coats. We were intoxicated by a book called Pieter Maritz, a Young Boer
from the Transvaal. But it wasn’t just us – the entire civilised world
followed with a sinking heart the tragedy being played out on the plains
between the Vaal and the Orange River, appalled at the unequal fight of a
small nation against a great world power. Even the organ grinder in Kiev,
who until then had only played ‘The Parting’, began to play a new song:
‘Transvaal, Transvaal, you burn in flames’. For this we gave him the five-
kopeck pieces we’d saved up for ice cream.
   For young boys like me the Boer War ruined the exotic dreams of
childhood. Africa, it turned out, was not at all as we had imagined it to be
based on the novels published in Around the World or from engineer
Gorodetsky’s house on Bankovaya Street in Kiev. The walls of his grey
house, which looked like a castle, were decorated with sculptures of
rhinoceroses, giraffes, lions, crocodiles, antelopes and other African beasts.
Instead of drainpipes, elephant trunks made of concrete hung down over the
pavement. Water dripped from the jaws of rhinoceroses. Grey stone boa
constrictors reared their heads from the façade’s dark recesses.
   The owner of the house, engineer Gorodetsky, was a fanatical hunter. He
had even travelled to Africa to hunt. It was in memory of these hunting
expeditions that he decorated his house with these stone figures of wild
beasts. Grown-ups said Gorodetsky was a bit mad, but we little boys loved
his strange house, and it had done much to shape our fantasies about Africa.
But now, even though we were still little, we understood that a huge
struggle for human rights was being waged on the so-called Dark
Continent, where until then we had thought only of the trumpeting of wise
elephants, the miasmas of the tropical jungles, and the hippopotamuses
quietly snorting in the slimy ooze of great uncharted rivers. Until then,
Africa existed as the land of explorers, of various Stanleys and
Livingstones.
   I, just like the other boys, was sorry to lose that Africa where we had
wandered in our dreams, to say goodbye to lion hunts, dawns over the sands
of the Sahara, rafts on the Niger, whistling arrows, the furious shrieks of
monkeys, the dark gloom of impenetrable forests. Danger awaited us there
at every turn. In our imagination we had already died many times of fever
or wounds behind the log walls of a fort listening to the whizz of a lone
bullet, breathing the poisonous vapours of the swamps, gazing with
inflamed eyes into the black velvety sky at the dying glimmer of the
Southern Cross. How often had I died regretting my short, young life and
my never having crossed mysterious Africa from Algiers to the Cape of
Good Hope, from the Congo to Zanzibar!
   Nevertheless, it was impossible to erase this image of Africa from my
mind completely. It had a life of its own. Hence, the shock, the wordless
amazement I felt at the appearance in our prosaic Kiev flat of a bearded
man, burnt by the African sun, sporting a wide-brimmed Boer hat and an
open-necked shirt with a cartridge clip on his belt – Uncle Yuzia. I followed
his every step, I gazed into his eyes. I couldn’t believe that these eyes
before me had seen the Orange River, Zulu kraals, British cavalrymen and
storms on the Pacific. This happened just as the president of the Transvaal,
the corpulent old Kruger,2 had come to Russia to request help for the Boers.
Uncle Yuzia had travelled with him. He stayed in Kiev just one day and
then departed for St Petersburg right behind Kruger. Uncle Yuzia was
convinced Russia would help the Boers. But from Petersburg he wrote to
Father: ‘Overriding considerations of State have forced the Russian
Government to make an ignominious decision: we will not be helping the
Boers. This means everything is lost, and I’m heading back now once more
to the Far East.’

                                      •

My grandfather – on my mother’s side – had not been a wealthy man. He
would not have been able to educate his many children – five daughters and
three sons – had he not sent all his sons to the Kiev Cadet Academy, where
education was free. Uncle Yuzia had studied there together with his
brothers. All went well for four years, but then in his fifth year Uncle Yuzia
was transferred from Kiev to the penal ‘convict’ academy in the town of
Volsk on the Volga. Cadets were sent to Volsk only for ‘serious crimes’.
Uncle Yuzia had committed just such a crime.
   The kitchen of the Kiev Cadet Academy was in the cellar. Before one of
the holidays a large number of buns had been baked and left to cool on a
long kitchen table. Uncle Yuzia got hold of a pole, fixed a nail to it, and
used it to fish out through an open window a few dozen brown buns, after
which he laid on a magnificent feast for his classmates. Uncle Yuzia spent
only two years in Volsk. In his third year he was expelled from the Cadet
Academy and demoted to the rank of private for striking an officer – the
officer had stopped him in the street and reprimanded him harshly for some
trifling fault in his uniform.
   Uncle Yuzia was given a soldier’s greatcoat and a rifle and sent off from
Volsk on foot to join an artillery unit in the town of Kutno near Warsaw. He
crossed the country from east to west in winter, reporting to the various
garrison commanders along the way, begging for his food in the villages,
sleeping where he could at night. He left Volsk a hot-headed boy and
arrived in Kutno an embittered soldier. In Kutno he advanced to ensign, the
lowest of the officers’ ranks.
   Uncle Yuzia was plagued by the worst possible luck in his military
career. He was transferred from the artillery to the infantry. His regiment
was sent to Moscow to do guard duty during the coronation of Nicholas II.
Uncle Yuzia’s company was ordered to guard the river embankment
alongside the Kremlin. Early on the morning of the coronation, my uncle
saw his soldiers race down to the river’s edge where a violent melee had
broken out. Gripping his sabre, he ran to join the soldiers. There in the mud
on the riverbank he encountered a terrifying creature with a bronze head
entangled in tubing. The soldiers had knocked the creature down and piled
on top of it, and it was awkwardly trying to kick them off with its enormous
lead boots. One of the soldiers wrapped a thick rubber hose around the
creature’s copper head and it let out a hoarse rattle and soon stopped
resisting. My uncle then realised that the creature was in fact a diver,
screamed at the soldiers and began to quickly unscrew the copper helmet,
but by then the diver was already dead. Neither my uncle nor the soldiers
had been informed that divers would be searching the bottom of the
Moscow River that morning for devilish devices.
   After this incident Uncle Yuzia was discharged from the army. He left for
central Asia, where he served for a while as the chief of camel caravans
travelling from Uralsk to Khiva and Bukhara. At the time central Asia had
yet to be linked to Russia by the railway, and so all goods had to be
unloaded from the trains at Uralsk and transferred onto camels and
transported thence by caravan. During one of these caravan trips my uncle
made friends with the Grum-Grzhimailo brothers,3 explorers of central
Asia, and hunted tigers with them. He sent Grandmother a gift of one of his
tiger skins that had such a ferocious expression on its dead face she
immediately hid it in the cellar, after first sprinkling it with mothballs.
   Uncle Yuzia loved to tell how he could kill jackals on the spot just by
sneezing at them. Out in the desert at night he’d lie down with his head on
the knapsack containing his food and pretend to fall asleep. The jackals
would creep up with their tails between their legs. Once the most brazen of
them began to carefully pull the knapsack with his teeth out from under our
uncle’s head, he’d let out a deafening sneeze and the cowardly jackal would
drop dead of heart failure right there without letting out so much as a yelp.
We believed him because we knew how loudly Uncle Yuzia sneezed in the
morning as he prepared for the day. Those sneezes caused the glass in the
windows to rattle and the terrified cat to race about the room trying to
escape. Uncle Yuzia’s tales were more interesting to us than the adventures
of Baron von Munchhausen. We had to conjure up Munchhausen in our
imaginations, whereas Uncle Yuzia was right there – alive, enveloped in
clouds of tobacco smoke, shaking the sofa with his laughter.
   After this, a sketchy period in Uncle Yuzia’s life began. He roamed about
Europe; he played, so some say, the roulette tables in Monte Carlo; and then
he turned up in Abyssinia from where he returned with an enormous gold
medal conferred upon him by the Negus Menelik.4 The medal looked like
the sort of badges worn here by janitors.
   Uncle Yuzia had trouble finding his place in life until his gaze turned
toward the mists of the Far East, to Manchuria and the land of the river
Ussuri. It was as if this country existed solely for people like Uncle Yuzia.
There one could live freely, expansively, to the full extent of one’s
unbridled nature and ambition without having to submit to any ‘asinine
laws’. This was the Russian Alaska – un-tamed, rich and dangerous. No
better place on earth for Uncle Yuzia could have been invented. The Amur,
the taiga, gold, the Pacific Ocean, Korea, and then beyond – Kamchatka,
Japan, Polynesia. A vast, unknown world thundered like the surf on the
shores of the Far East, exciting the imagination of such men.
   Uncle Yuzia went off to the Far East, but only after having taken for
himself a wife, a young religious ascetic, or so Mama insisted since in her
opinion only some sort of ascetic could stand being married to such an
awful man as my uncle. There he took part in the defence of Harbin during
the Boxer Rebellion, in fights with the honghuzi and in the construction of
the Chinese Eastern Railway, interrupting these undertakings only to go to
the Transvaal. After the Boer War he returned to the Far East, although not
to Manchuria, but to Port Arthur, where he worked as an agent of the
Russian Volunteer Fleet. Uncle Yuzia wrote to us that he’d fallen in love
with ships and the sea and regretted not having become a sailor in his youth.
   About this time his wife died, and Uncle Yuzia was left with two little
daughters on his hands. An affectionate though somewhat bungling father,
he raised them with the help of his old Chinese servant, whom my uncle
called ‘Fetch Me-tea’.5 Uncle Yuzia loved this devoted man nearly as much
as his own daughters. He loved the Chinese in general and liked to say that
this splendid, kind and wise people had but one shortcoming – a fear of
rain.
   During the Russo-Japanese War Uncle Yuzia was called up into the army
as a former officer. He sent his daughters and ‘Fetch Metea’ off to live in
Harbin. After the war he visited us in Kiev. This was the last time I saw
him. By then he was already grey and staid, but those rambunctious and
merry sparkles still flickered from time to time in his eyes. He told us all
about Peking, about the gardens of the Chinese emperors, about Shanghai
and the Yellow River. After such stories China became for me a land of
eternal warm and clear nights. Maybe that impression was due to the fact
that Uncle Yuzia no longer made things up, no longer rolled his eyes or
roared with laughter, but spoke in a tired voice, constantly flicking the ash
from his cigarette.
   That was in 1905. Uncle Yuzia had little understanding of politics. He
considered himself an old soldier, and he was – honourable and loyal to his
oath. When my father began one of his critical and dangerous speeches,
Uncle Yuzia fell silent, walked out into the garden, sat down on a bench and
smoked in solitude. He considered Father ‘more leftist than the left’. In the
autumn of ’05 a battalion of sappers together with a company of bridge
engineers mutinied in Kiev. The sappers fought their way through the city,
holding off a company of Cossacks sent in to put them down. The workers
of the South Russian Machine Works joined the sappers. A crowd of
children ran in front of the rebels. The Azov Sapper Regiment opened fire
on the mutineers at the Galitsky Market, killing a great many children and
workers. The rebellious sappers couldn’t return fire because of a crowd of
civilians between them and the Azov men.
   Uncle Yuzia became very agitated when he learned of the day’s events;
pacing back and forth in the garden, he chain-smoked and swore under his
breath. ‘The Azovs,’ he muttered, ‘those fools. What a disgrace! And those
sappers are no better – not marksmen, but petty thieves!’
   And then he vanished without notice, and by evening had still not
returned. He didn’t come back that night or the next day. In fact, he never
returned. Finally, six months later a letter arrived from one of his daughters
in Harbin. She informed us that Uncle Yuzia had settled in Japan and asked
us to forgive him for his sudden disappearance. Much later we learned that
Uncle Yuzia had gone over to the sappers and was so enraged by the sight
of the massacred children that together with Lieutenant Zhadanovsky, the
leader of the rebellion, he organised a group of sappers and they had
unleashed such a fusillade on the government’s troops that they had been
forced to retreat. After this Uncle Yuzia had no choice but to flee. He left
for Japan, where he soon died in the city of Kobe from cardiac asthma and
that most horrible of illnesses – homesickness. Towards the end of his life,
this enormous and ferocious man would cry at the slightest reminder of
Russia. In his last letter he asked, almost as if in jest, to send him in an
envelope the most precious gift he could think of – a dried leaf from a Kiev
chestnut tree.


1 Nikolai Przhevalsky (1839–88), famous geographer and explorer of
central and eastern Asia.
2Paul Kruger (1825–1904), president of the South African Republic 1883–
1900.
3Grigory Grum-Grzhimailo (1860–1936), entomologist and lepidopterist,
made numerous voyages to collect in central Asia and the Russian Far East;
Vladimir (1864–1928), his younger brother, a noted metallurgist.
4Menelik II (1884–1913), negus of Shewa 1866–89, emperor of Ethiopia
1889–1913.
5  Paustovsky’s uncle called his servant ‘Sam Pyu-chai’, which can be
translated literally as ‘Drink tea myself’, an expression of a then rather
common – and clearly xenophobic – punning on what were for Russians
strange-sounding Chinese names and words.

                             OceanofPDF.com
8
Svyatoslavskaya Street



The    visits to Cherkassy and Gorodishche were the holidays of my
childhood, while my humdrum, everyday life was centred in Kiev. Here we
spent the long winters in our dreary flat on Svyatoslavskaya Street. The
street, lined with monotonous blocks of flats of the same yellow Kievan
bricks that were used for the pavement, ended in an enormous open area
furrowed with gullies. There were several of these empty plots in the city.
They were called ‘the ravines’.
   All day long carts loaded with clay and rock rumbled past our house on
Svyatoslavskaya Street on their way to the ravine. They dumped their loads
into the ravines to level them out in preparation for building more houses.
The dirt was always spilling from these carts and leaving behind a muddy
mess, which is why I never did like Svyatoslavskaya Street.
   We were strictly forbidden from going into the ravine. It was a terrifying
place, a hideout for beggars and thieves. Nevertheless, all of us boys would
on occasion form a gang and walk down together. We brought a police
whistle with us just in case. To our minds it was as reliable a weapon as a
revolver. At first, we just stood on the edge and looked warily down into the
ravine. We could make out shards of sparkly broken glass, rusty tin cans,
and dogs digging around in the rubbish. They never paid us any attention.
Then we became brave enough to begin to descend. Dirty yellow smoke
curled up from the hovels and dugouts at the bottom. The hovels were
constructed out of any old thing lying about – broken plywood, old tin,
battered crates, seats from bentwood chairs, mattresses with their springs
sticking out of them. Dirty sacks served as doors. Dishevelled women in
rags sat around the fires in the ravine. They called us ‘the masters’ boys’
and begged money for vodka. Only one of them, a grey, shaggy old woman
with the face of a lioness, smiled at us, displaying her last remaining tooth.
   She was from Italy and was well known in Kiev. She went from door to
door playing the accordion for money. For a little extra she would play ‘La
Marseillaise’. On those occasions, one boy stood lookout by the gate to
watch for the police. This beggar woman not only played ‘La Marseillaise’
on the accordion, she screamed it in her furious, wheezing voice. In her
rendition the song sounded like an angry call to arms, a curse uttered by the
inhabitants of the Svyatoslavsky ravine.
   There were familiar faces among the inhabitants of the hovels. There was
the beggar Yasha Paduchy, for example, whose white eyes were always
bleary from too much vodka. He liked to sit on the steps of St Vladimir’s
Cathedral moaning the same few words over and over: ‘Good people, take
pity on a cripple who needs his tipple!’ Back in the ravine Yasha Paduchy
was not at all the snivelling, gentle beggar he played at the cathedral. He
would drink down a quarter of a litre of vodka in one swallow, beat his
chest with all his might, and howl tearfully: ‘Come unto me, all ye that
labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest!’
   Then there was the old bald man who hawked toothbrushes on
Fundukleevskaya Street near Café François, and next to him the organ
grinder with his parrot. Alongside the hovels clay ovens belched smoke
through broken samovar funnels. I liked the organ grinder’s hovel most of
all. He was gone all day long, out wandering from street to street, but a
barefoot girl sat on the ground nearby peeling potatoes. She had an earthy
complexion and pretty, sullen eyes. One of her legs was bound with rags.
   This was the organ grinder’s daughter. A tumbler so flexible she didn’t
seem to have any bones, she had earlier gone door to door with her father. A
skinny little girl in blue tights, she would lay out a small carpet on the
ground and perform acrobatic tricks for money. But then she injured her
legs and could no longer ‘work’. She liked to read the same book over and
over. The cover had been torn off but based on the illustrations I guessed it
was The Three Musketeers. She used to get angry and shout at us: ‘What is
it you want with us? Haven’t you ever seen how ordinary people live?’ But
then she got used to us and stopped shouting. Once her short, grey father
ran into us in the ravine and said to her: ‘Let them see how we suffer down
here. Maybe it’ll be of use to them one day when they’re students.’
   Initially, we went down into the ravine in a gang, but then I became
accustomed to its inhabitants and started to go by myself. I hid this from
Mama for a long time, but the organ grinder’s daughter gave me away. I had
brought her Uncle Tom’s Cabin to read and then became ill for a long time
and never did come back for it. She began to worry and came to our flat to
return the book. Mama opened the door, and that was the end of my secret. I
could tell what had happened by Mama’s tight lips and icy silence.
   That evening my parents sat down in the dining room to discuss my
behaviour. I stood listening outside the door. Mama was upset and cross, but
my father said that it was nothing to worry about, that it wouldn’t ruin me,
and that he preferred I was friends with these unfortunate people rather than
with the sons of Kiev’s merchants and officials. To this Mama replied that
at my age I had to be protected from the distressing parts of life.
   ‘Listen,’ said Father, ‘these people repay decent, honest treatment with a
devotion you won’t find in our circles. How can this be distressing?’
   Mama was silent and then said: ‘Yes, maybe you’re right . . .’
   After I had recovered, she gave me Mark Twain’s The Prince and the
Pauper and said: ‘Here . . . take this to the organ grinder’s daughter. I don’t
know her name.’
   ‘Liza,’ I said shyly.
   ‘Well then, take the book to Liza. As a present.’
   From then on no one at home made any fuss about my visits to the
Svyatoslavsky ravine. I no longer had to sneak out with a bit of sugar from
the sideboard for my new friends or with nuts for Mitka, the half-blind
parrot. I simply asked Mama for them. And she never said no. I was
grateful to Mama for this, and my spirit was as light as only that of a boy
with a clear conscience can be.
   Early one autumn morning the organ grinder appeared in our courtyard
without his parrot. He slowly turned the crank, his heart not in it, and the
organ whistled out a polka: ‘Come along, come along, my angel, come
along and dance with me.’ His eyes searched the balconies and the open
windows, waiting for the moment when the coppers, wrapped in paper,
would begin flying out into the yard.
   I ran out to the organ grinder. He went on turning the crank and said:
‘Mitka’s sick. Just sits there like a hedgehog. He won’t even crack your
nuts. It’s obvious, he’s dying.’ The organ grinder took off his dusty black
cap and wiped his face with it. ‘What a hopeless existence!’ he said. ‘An
organ grinder without his Mitka can’t even earn enough for his vodka, let
alone his bread. Now who’ll help me tell people their fortune?’
   For five kopecks the parrot would pick out for the curious little green,
blue or red tickets with fortunes printed on them. For some reason these
tickets were called ‘good fortune’. The tickets were rolled up into little
tubes and placed like cigarettes in a cartridge case. Before pulling out a
ticket, Mitka stamped up and down for a long time on his perch and
screeched unhappily.
   The fortunes were written in rather obscure language. ‘You were born
under the sign of Mercury, and your stone is the emerald, also known as the
smaragd, which signifies a dislike for worldly affairs and a final mastery
over them only once you have reached those years marked by the white of
your hair. Beware of blonds, be they male or female, and do not venture out
on the feast of St John the Baptist.’
   Sometimes the tickets contained short, sinister phrases: ‘Tomorrow at
dusk’ or ‘If you wish to go on living, never turn round.’
   A day later Mitka was dead, and I buried him in a shoe box in the ravine.
The organ grinder got drunk and disappeared. I told Mama about the
parrot’s death. My lips quivered, but I managed to keep my composure.
   ‘Get dressed,’ Mama said in a stern voice. ‘We’re going to Burmistrov’s.’
Burmistrov was a nearly deaf old man whose beard was green with age. He
looked like a gnome. In a dark, cramped shop in Bessarabka, Burmistrov
traded in the most marvellous things – fishing rods, brightly coloured floats,
fish tanks, goldfish, birds, ants’ eggs and transfers. Mama bought from
Burmistrov an old green parrot with a lead ring on its leg. He lent us a cage.
I carried it with the parrot inside out of the shop. Along the way the bird
managed to bite my finger down to the bone. We stepped into a chemist’s
and had it bandaged but I was so excited I hardly felt a thing. I wanted to go
straight to the organ grinder and give him the parrot, but Mama said: ‘I am
going with you. I must see this for myself.’
   She went to her room to change. I was ashamed that Mama would change
into her finer clothes before going to visit some poor and bedraggled
people, but I didn’t have the courage to say anything to her. A few minutes
later she came out. She was wearing an old dress, darned at the elbows. She
had thrown a kerchief over her head. For once she was going out without
her elegant kid gloves. As for her shoes, she had chosen the pair with the
worn-down heels. I looked at her gratefully, and we set off.
   Mama descended steadfastly into the ravine, passing dishevelled women
struck dumb with amazement and never once bothering to lift her skirt to
avoid the mounds of rubbish and cinders. Upon seeing us with the parrot,
Liza blushed, her grey face turning a bright red, and made a hurried curtsy
to Mama. The organ grinder was not at home – he was still out drowning
his sorrow with his friends in Demievka. Liza took the parrot and, her face
reddening ever more and more, kept repeating the same words: ‘Oh, but
you shouldn’t have! You shouldn’t have!’
   ‘Do you think he can be taught to tell people’s fortunes?’ Mama asked.
   ‘Yes, of course, in two days’ time!’ Liza said, full of joy. ‘Oh, but you
shouldn’t have! Good Lord! Why? He must have been expensive!’
   After hearing about this back at home, Father grinned and said: ‘Ladies’
philanthropy! It’s their sentimental education!’
   ‘Oh, Lord!’ exclaimed Mama, annoyed with my father. ‘I truly don’t
know why you insist on contradicting yourself. You really are too much.
You would have done exactly the same in my place.’
   ‘No,’ my father replied, ‘I would have done more.’
   ‘More?’ Mama asked. I could hear a threat in her voice. ‘Oh, really?
Well, we shall see!’
   ‘Yes, we shall see!’
   I didn’t realise that my father was doing this deliberately just to upset
Mama.
   The day after this row Mama sent Liza my sister’s black dress and a pair
of her own brown boots. But my father was not to be outdone. He waited
for the organ grinder to return to the yard with his new parrot. The organ
grinder sported a red scarf around his neck. The vodka had lent his nose the
red sheen of victory. In Mama’s honour he played every last tune that his
organ knew: a march, ‘Longing for the Motherland’; a waltz, ‘Waves of the
Danube’; a polka, ‘The Parting’; and a song, ‘Oh, How the Box Is Full to
Bursting’.
   Once again, the parrot selected people’s fortunes. Generous hands tossed
paper-wrapped coppers from the windows. Some of these the organ grinder
caught gracefully in his cap. Then he slung the organ on his back and set
off, bent low, as always, by the weight, but this time not out into the street
but up the front staircase to our door where he rang the bell.
   Having doffed his cap and extending it so low it brushed the floor, he
thanked Mama and kissed her hand. Father came out and invited the organ
grinder into his study. He leaned his organ gently against the wall in the
front hall and then, moving carefully, followed my father. He served the
organ grinder a cognac, saying that he understood what a difficult and
uncertain life he led, and then offered him a position as watchman on the
South-West Railway. He would have his own little house and garden.
   ‘Don’t judge me too harshly, Georgy Maximovich,’ he replied, blushing,
‘but I’d be bored to death. It seems I’m fated to spend my life a poor organ
grinder.’
   He left. Mama could not hide her look of victory, although she did
manage to keep quiet.
   A few days later the police unexpectedly evicted the inhabitants of the
Svyatoslavsky ravine. Liza and the organ grinder disappeared. Most likely
they moved on to another town. But before all this happened, I did manage
to visit the ravine one last time. The organ grinder invited me to ‘spend the
evening’ at his place. On an overturned crate he had laid out a plate with
baked tomatoes and black bread, a bottle of cherry brandy and some old-
looking sweets – fat, sugary sticks of striped rock. Liza wore a new dress,
her hair in tight plaits. A worried look on her face, she kept offering me
food and insisting I eat as if my mother had prepared it. The parrot, its eyes
covered by a leather band, slept. From time to time the organ let out a sing-
song wheeze all on its own. The organ grinder explained that this was
caused by some air trapped in its pipes.
   It was already September. Twilight was approaching. No one who has
never been in Kiev in autumn could ever imagine the delicate beauty of
those hours. The first star catches fire up in the sky. Autumn’s lush gardens
wait in silence, knowing the stars must fall to earth and the gardens will
catch them in their dense foliage, as if in a hammock, and then set them
down on the ground so gently that no one in town will wake up or even
know.
   Liza saw me home. She thrust a sticky pink sweet in my hand as a
parting gift and then ran off down the stairs. And I, knowing I would be in
trouble for returning so late, stood for a long time trying to find the courage
to ring the bell.

                              OceanofPDF.com
9
Winter Scenes



My     father gave me a pair of Halifax ice skates for Christmas. Boys
nowadays would laugh at such skates, but back then there were no better
skates in the world than those from the city of Halifax.
   Where is this city? I used to ask everyone. Where was this old city of
Halifax, buried in snow, where all the boys had skates like mine? Where
was this wintry land inhabited by aged sailors and bright schoolboys? No
one could tell me. Borya, the eldest of us boys in the family, supposed that
Halifax did not refer to a city, but to the name of the skates’ manufacturer.
My father believed Halifax was a small town – yes, that’s right, he said, a
town on the island of Newfoundland off the northern coast of America and
it was famous not only for its ice skates but for its sled-dogs.
   The skates lay on my table. I looked at them and thought about the town
of Halifax. After receiving the skates, I immediately imagined this town and
saw it so clearly in my mind that I could have drawn a detailed map with all
its streets and squares.
   I could sit at the table over my Malinin and Burenin arithmetic book – I
was preparing that winter for my entrance examinations to the gymnasium –
for hours on end thinking about Halifax. This aspect of my character
frightened Mama. She worried about my ‘fantasies’ and liked to say that
poverty and death in a ditch would come to little boys like me. This dismal
prediction – ‘you’ll end up dead in a ditch’ – was popular back then. For
some reason death in a ditch was considered to be particularly shameful. I
heard this prediction often, but still more often Mama said that I had
‘dislocated brains that weren’t anything like other people’s’. She worried
that I would end up a failure.
   Father was furious whenever he heard this and would say to Mama: ‘Let
him be a failure, or a beggar, or a tramp, or whatever, I don’t care, just as
long as he doesn’t grow up to be one of those damned Kiev philistines!’
   With time I too became rather afraid and embarrassed by my
imagination. It seemed to me I was wasting my time on nonsense, while all
around me everyone else was engaged in serious matters: my brothers and
sister went to the gymnasium and worked hard on their lessons, my father
served in the management of the South-West Railway, and Mama sewed
and kept the house. I alone lived cut off from the general cares of the world,
wasting my time doing nothing.
   ‘I wish you’d go skating rather than just sit around dreaming up heaven
knows what,’ said Mama. ‘What a funny little boy! Just look at yourself !’
   I went out to skate. The winter days were short. It grew dark while I was
still on the ice. A military band appeared and started to play. Little coloured
lights were lit. Schoolgirls in fur coats, their hands tucked inside small
muffs, skated in large circles, swaying from side to side. The boys skated
backwards or ‘pistol-fashion’ – crouched down on one leg with the other
stuck straight out. This was considered the height of style. I envied them.
   I returned home tired and red-cheeked from the cold. But my heart was
still beset by worry, because even after skating, I could feel that same
dangerous inclination to daydreaming.
   On the ice I often met my sister Galya’s friend – Katyusha Desnitskaya, a
pupil in the upper forms at the Fundukleevskaya Gymnasium for Girls. She
also had Halifax skates, although her blades were made of burnished, black
steel. My brother Borya, a pupil at the local maths and science school at the
time, was courting Katyusha. They waltzed together on the ice. First, the
speedskaters would clear a wide circle on the ice, cuffing the street boys on
their homemade skates to get them to stop horsing around. Then, a slow,
gliding dance would begin. Even Kovarík, the red-haired Czech
bandmaster, turned round to watch the dance. A sweet smile stretched from
ear to ear on his ruddy face.
   Desnitskaya’s long plaits flew about in time with the music. They got in
her way, and so, without stopping, she placed them on her chest and gazed
haughtily out from under her half-closed eyes at her admiring public. I
watched Borya with malicious joy. He did not dance as well as Katyusha.
Sometimes he even lost an edge and slipped on his Yacht Club skates,
which he was so proud of. I never could have imagined that day on the ice
that Desnitskaya’s life would become more unbelievable than any of my
fantasies.
   One of the sons of the king of Siam, Prince Chakrabongse, had been a
student at the Corps des Pages in St Petersburg. Once on his way home he
fell ill with pneumonia and was brought to Kiev and placed in the tsar’s
palace, where he was attended to by a number of local doctors. The prince
recovered, but before he could continue his journey to Siam he first had to
rest in Kiev for two months. He became bored. Every last effort was made
to entertain him – he was taken to balls at the Merchants’ Club, to charity
galas and raffles, to the circus, to the theatre.
   At one of these balls the prince saw Katyusha Desnitskaya. She was
dancing a waltz, just as she had done on the ice, her plaits falling down over
her chest and her half-closed lids partially concealing her haughty blue eyes
that she cast about the room. The prince was enchanted. A short man with
tawny skin, slanting eyes and hair that shone as if it had been rubbed down
with shoe polish, he fell in love with Katyusha. He departed for Siam, but
then soon returned to Kiev incognito and proposed to Katyusha. She
accepted. The girls at the gymnasium were shocked. With one voice they
insisted that were they in her position none of them would marry an Asian
no matter what, even if he were the son of a king.
   Katyusha went off to Siam. Soon thereafter the king died of some
tropical disease, and then the eldest prince, and heir to the throne, also died.
Katyusha’s husband was the late king’s second son. He had had little hope
of ascending the throne. But following the death of his brother he became
the lone heir and was crowned the new king. Thus Katyusha, a carefree
schoolgirl from Kiev, became the queen of Siam.
   The courtiers hated their foreign queen. Her very existence violated the
traditions of the royal court of Siam. Katyusha ordered that electricity be
brought to Bangkok. This was the straw that broke the courtiers’ backs. It is
said that they decided to poison this queen who had sought to improve the
nation’s ancient customs. And so, they supposedly gathered old electric
lightbulbs and ground the glass into a fine powder that they mixed into her
food. Within six months she was dead from intestinal bleeding.
   Her king erected a memorial on her grave. A tall elephant of black
marble, a golden crown on its head, its trunk hanging despondently, was
placed in thick grass that reached up to its knees. It is beneath this grass that
Katyusha Desnitskaya, the young queen of Siam, lies.1
   Afterwards, every time I set foot on that ice, I recalled Katyusha waltzing
to ‘Irretrievable Time’ under the direction of the bandmaster and the way
she would brush the snow from her forehead and brow with her mittens,
and I recalled her skates of black steel – those skates from the city of
Halifax, home to all those kind-hearted old sailors. I wish I could have told
them the story of Katyusha. At first, they would have gaped in
astonishment, then flushed with anger at the courtiers, and finally just
shaken their heads as they contemplated the vicissitudes of human fortune.

                                      •

In the wintertime I went to the theatre with my family.
   The first work I saw was The Capture of Izmail. I didn’t like it all. This
was because I had spied a man wearing glasses and shiny velvet trousers in
the wings standing next to Suvorov who then proceeded to shove him so
hard in the back that Suvorov leapt out onto the stage crowing like a cock.
The second, however, Rostand’s La Princesse Lointaine, took my breath
away.2 It had everything to stir my imagination: a ship’s deck, enormous
sails, troubadours, knights, a princess.
   I fell in love with the Solovtsovsky Theatre, with its powder-blue velvet
upholstery and its cosy boxes. After each performance my parents could not
drag me out of the theatre no matter how hard they tried until all the lights
had been extinguished. The darkness of the hall, the lingering smell of
perfume and orange peel – all this enticed me so that I dreamed of hiding
under my seat and spending the whole night alone in the empty theatre. As
a child I was unable to distinguish between the drama on the stage and real
life, and so I genuinely suffered and even fell ill after every performance.
   The theatre fed my passion for reading. It was enough just to see
Madame Sans-Gêne to make me devour every last book about Napoleon.
The various periods and people I had seen on the stage came to life for me
in a miraculous way and were filled with a rare attraction and charm.
   It wasn’t just the plays that I loved. I loved the theatre’s long corridors
with their mirrors in faded gilt frames, the dark cloakrooms that smelled of
fur, the mother-of-pearl opera glasses, the impatient stamping of horses’
hooves waiting before the entrance. During the interval I liked to run to the
end of the corridor to look out of the window. It was pitch black outside. All
I could make out was the white of the snow on the trees. Then I would
quickly turn round to take in the light of the sumptuous hall, the
chandeliers, the lustre of the women’s hair, their bracelets and earrings, and
the velvet stage curtain that gently rippled in a warm draught. I did this over
and over – first looking out of the window, then at the hall, then out of the
window, then at the hall. It made me so happy.
   I did not like opera. Apparently, this was because the first one my parents
took me to was Rubinstein’s Demon.3 The lead performer had heavy lips
and a greasy, impudent face, and he sang his part of the demon in a lazy and
sloppy sort of way. He wore hardly any makeup. This large, pot-bellied
figure of a man looked silly in his long black muslin shirt, complete with
spangles, and wings affixed to his back. He sang with such a pronounced
burr that I couldn’t keep from laughing. Mama became indignant and never
took me to the opera again.
   Aunt Dozia came to stay with us from Gorodishche every winter. Mama
loved to take her to the theatre. She always had trouble sleeping the night
before. Several hours before the performance even started, she put on a
loose-fitting dress of brown satin, embroidered with yellow flowers and
leaves, tossed a matching brown shawl over her shoulders, and grabbed her
tiny lace handkerchief. A bit anxious but now looking a good ten years
younger, she and Mama would leave for the theatre in a droshky. Just like
all women from the Ukrainian countryside, Aunt Dozia covered her head
with a black kerchief decorated with little roses.
   Everyone at the theatre couldn’t help but stare at Aunt Dozia, but she was
so taken by the performance that she didn’t notice a thing. Mama took her
mostly to Ukrainian plays and operas – Natalya from Poltava, A Cossack
beyond the Danube and Shelmenko the Driver. Once Aunt Dozia jumped
out of her seat at a performance and shouted in Ukrainian at the villain:
‘Such impudence! Just what do you think you’re doing, you wretch!’ The
audience roared with laughter. Down came the curtain. Aunt Dozia cried the
whole next day from shame and kept apologising to my father. Nothing we
did could calm her down.
   It was with Aunt Dozia that we went to the cinema for the first time.
Back then the cinema was called ‘L’Illusion’ or ‘Cinématographe Lumière’.
The first showing was arranged in the Opera House. My father was ecstatic
over the illusion and hailed it as one of the marvellous innovations of the
twentieth century.
   A damp grey sheet had been stretched across the stage. Then the
chandeliers were extinguished. A sinister greenish light appeared on the
sheet followed by some jumping black spots. Directly over our heads a
smoky shaft of light coursed through the darkness. There came a horrifying
sizzling sound, as if someone were roasting a whole wild boar behind our
backs. Aunt Dozia asked Mama: ‘Why does it crackle like that, this
illusion? Do you think we’ll all be burnt like chickens in a coop?’
   After a lot of blinking a title appeared on the sheet: The Terrible Eruption
of Mount Pelée and Destruction of St Pierre, Martinique. A Travel-Film.
The screen shook and then, as if through a dust storm, a volcano appeared.
Burning lava erupted from deep inside. Everyone was overwhelmed by the
spectacle, and they began making a loud noise that spread throughout the
hall. Next we were shown a comic picture about life in a French barracks. A
drummer beat his drum as soldiers woke up, jumped out of bed and began
to pull on their trousers. A large rat fell out of one soldier’s trouser legs. It
ran around the barracks as the soldiers, terrified and their eyes bulging in
exaggerated fashion, climbed onto their beds and hung from the doors and
windows. With that, the film ended.
   ‘Pure buffoonery!’ Mama said. ‘Just like the shows they put on at the
Contract Fair, except those are much more interesting.’ Father remarked
that unimaginative folks had laughed in just the same way at Stephenson’s
steam locomotive,4 and Aunt Dozia, in an attempt to make peace, said:
‘Who needs these illusions anyway? Not the sort of thing for us women to
bother ourselves with.’
   The side-shows at the Contract Fair were in fact quite interesting. We
loved the fair and waited anxiously all winter long for it to open. It always
took place at the end of winter in the Podol part of town in the old Contract
House and the many wooden booths set up around it. The fair typically
opened during the first thaw when the dirt roads all turned to mud. The
strong smells of the various wares travelled far – new barrels, leather,
gingerbread and calico. I especially liked the merry-go-round, the toys and
the panopticon. Buttery blocks of vanilla and chocolate halva crunched
under the salesmen’s knives. Translucent pieces of rose and lemon Turkish
delight stuck to my teeth. Huge earthenware platters were piled with
pyramids of sugared pears, plums and cherries – the work of Kiev’s famous
confectioner Balabukha.
   Roughly carved wooden soldiers finished in cheap paint stood in rows on
bast mats laid out over the muddy ground – Cossacks in tall hats and wide
trousers with crimson piping, drummers with fierce, bulging eyes, buglers
with tassels on their horns. Clay whistles lay in piles. Cheerful old men
jostled through the crowd hawking strange and alluring toys, like the ‘Man
from the Sea’, which turned out to be just a small rubber figure in the shape
of a devil that dived and twisted about in a glass jar filled with water.
   We were immersed in a deafening noise – the hawkers’ cries, the clang of
metal cart wheels, the bells of the Bratsky Bogoyavlensky Monastery
ringing for Lent, and the squeals of little boys on the merry-go-round. For a
few kopecks extra, the merry-go-round spun so fast that everything turned
into a motley confusion of grinning, papier-mâché horses’ heads, neckties,
boots, swelling skirts, coloured garters, lace and kerchiefs. Sometimes the
relentless twirling caused a necklace to break, sending glass beads flying
like bullets into the faces of the spectators.
   The panopticon scared me a little, especially the wax figures. The
murdered French president Carnot5 lay smiling on the floor in his dress coat
with a ceremonial star pinned to it. Unnaturally thick blood – it looked like
red Vaseline – oozed down his shirt front. Carnot seemed pleased at having
died so efficiently. A wax Cleopatra pressed a black asp to her firm,
greenish breast. A mermaid with violet eyes lay in a zinc bathtub. Her
grimy scales reflected the dim light of a single electric bulb. The water in
the tub was murky. A boa constrictor slept on an eiderdown in an open
trunk covered with wire netting. Every so often he tensed his muscles, and
the visitors stepped back in fear.
   A stuffed gorilla, surrounded by dense foliage of painted wood shavings,
carried off a swooning girl with long, flowing blond hair into the forest
depths. For three kopecks you could shoot at the gorilla with a Monte Cristo
pistol and try to save the girl. If you hit the round target on its chest, the
gorilla dropped what proved to be a rag doll. A thick cloud of dust went up
every time she hit the floor. Next, a chintz curtain was drawn for a minute,
and then the gorilla reappeared, as fierce as before, and once again he
carried the girl off into that dense and oddly coloured forest.
   We also loved the Contract Fair because it heralded the approach of
Easter, our trip to Grandmother in Cherkassy, and then the always
magnificent and unforgettable Kiev spring.


1 In fact, Yekaterina Desnitskaya (b. 1886) lived until 1960. She married
Prince Chakrabongse Bhuvanath (1883–1920) in 1906 and returned with
him to Bangkok. They had one son, and then divorced in 1919.
2Alexander Suvorov (1729–1800), celebrated general and field marshal;
Edmond Rostand (1868–1918), French dramatist and poet.
3   Anton Rubinstein (1829–94), pianist and composer.
4George Stephenson (1781–1848), British engineer known as the ‘Father of
Railways’.
5 Marie François Carnot (1837–94), statesman and French president,
assassinated while in office by an Italian anarchist.

                              OceanofPDF.com
10
The Midshipman



Spring in Kiev began when the Dnieper overflowed its banks. All one had
to do was go out onto Vladimirskaya Hill on the edge of town and there
before your eyes lay an expansive sea of bluish water.
   But it wasn’t just the Dnieper that flooded. Every spring Kiev witnessed
a flood of sunlight, of freshness and of soft, fragrant breezes. On
Bibikovsky Boulevard the cone-shaped poplars blossomed and filled the
neighbouring streets with the smell of incense. The chestnut trees put out
their first leaves – translucent, wrinkled and covered with a faint reddish
fur. By the time the yellow and pink candles had blossomed on the chestnut
trees, spring had reached its height. Waves of cool air, the scent of young
grass and the sound of new, rustling leaves poured out of the ancient parks
and into the city streets.
   Caterpillars crawled along the pavement, even on Kreshchatik. The wind
swept dried petals into piles. Cockchafers and butterflies flew into the trams
through the open windows. The nightingales sang in the dark, front gardens.
The fluff from the poplars swirled over the pavements like the surf upon the
Black Sea. Dandelions yellowed along the roadside. Striped awnings were
lowered against the sun over the open windows of the pastry shops and
coffee houses. Sprigs of lilac, sprinkled with water, stood in vases on the
restaurant tables. The young girls of Kiev searched among the lilacs for a
five-petalled bloom. Under their straw summer hats the girls’ faces acquired
a matt ochre hue.
   Spring was the season of Kiev’s parks. I spent all my days in them. I
played there, did my lessons there, read there. I went home only to eat and
sleep.
   I knew every corner of the enormous Botanical Gardens with its gullies,
its pond and the thick shadows of its ancient lime-tree allées. But my
favourite was Mariinsky Park in Lipki near the palace. It overlooked the
Dnieper. Its walls of purple and white lilac, three times a man’s height,
swayed and hummed with great swarms of bees. Fountains scattered among
its meadows shot water high into the air.
   A wide belt of parks stretched along the red-clay cliffs overhanging the
Dnieper – Mariinsky Park, Palace Park, the Tsars’ Park and the Merchants’
Park, which was famous for its expansive view of Podol. The people of
Kiev were especially proud of this view. A symphony orchestra played in
the Merchants’ Park all summer long. The only thing that disturbed the
sound of the music were the long hoots of the steamers’ whistles that
wafted up from the Dnieper. The final park along the banks was
Vladimirskaya Hill. Here stood the monument to Prince Vladimir, holding a
large bronze cross in his hand. Electric lights had been affixed to the cross.
When they turned them on at night the fiery cross appeared to hang high up
in the sky over the steep slopes of Kiev.
   The city was so beautiful in the spring that I never could understand
Mama’s passion for those obligatory Sunday trips out to Boyarka, the
Voditsa Woods or Darnitsa in the surrounding countryside. I was bored by
the Voditsa Woods and their dachas, each one just like the others,
indifferent to Boyarka and its scraggy allée dedicated to the poet Nadson,1
and hated Darnitsa with its pines ringed by trampled grass and its thick,
heavy, cigarette-butt-littered sands.
   One spring day I sat reading Robert Louis Stevenson’s Treasure Island in
Mariinsky Park. Galya, my sister, sat next to me reading as well. Her
summer hat lay beside her on the bench. The hat’s green ribbons stirred in
the wind. Galya was short-sighted and very trusting and it was almost
impossible to upset her gentle nature.
   It had rained that morning, but now a clear, bright spring sky shone
overhead. Now and then a few last raindrops fell from the lilacs. A girl with
bows in her hair stopped in front of us and started skipping with a rope. She
was disturbing my reading. I shook the lilac tree. A light rain splashed the
girl and Galya. The girl stuck out her tongue at me and ran off. Galya just
wiped the raindrops off her book and continued reading.
   It was at this very moment that I caught sight of the man who for a long
time to come was to poison my mind with dreams of an unattainable future.
   Casually strolling down the allée came a tall, tanned midshipman. A
straight, black cutlass hung from his shiny belt. Black ribbons decorated
with bronze anchors fluttered in the breeze. He was all in black. A few
glittering gold stripes were the only bits of colour on his severe uniform.
Sailors were a rarity in land-locked Kiev, and we almost never saw them.
Yet here was a visitor from the remote and legendary world of the great
sailing ships, like the frigate Pallada, from the world of all the oceans and
seas, all the ports, all the winds, and all the fascination that goes with the
exotic life of a seafarer. His old, black-hilted sword appeared in Mariinsky
Park as if it had just leapt from the pages of Stevenson.
   The midshipman walked past, the gravel crunching under his feet. Galya
was too short-sighted to notice my disappearance. All my dreams of the sea
were embodied in this man. I had often imagined the sea, foggy and gold in
the evening calm, and myself on some distant voyage, the whole world
changing before my eyes like the quickly shifting shapes in a kaleidoscope.
My God, if only someone had thought at the time to gift me a piece of
crusty rust off an old anchor! I would have cherished it like a jewel.
   The midshipman stopped and looked around. On the black ribbon of his
sailor’s cap I read the mysterious word Azimut. I later learned that this was
the name of a training ship of the Baltic fleet. I followed him down
Yelizavetinskaya Street, then down Institutskaya, and Nikolaevskaya. He
saluted the passing infantry officers with such casual style that I became
ashamed of our clumsy Kievan warriors. He looked back a few times and
then stopped at the corner of Meringovskaya Street and called me over.
   ‘Little boy,’ he asked playfully, ‘why are you following in my wake like
some tugboat?’
   I blushed and said nothing.
   ‘I see. Dreams of becoming a sailor, does he?’ the midshipman said,
referring to me for some reason in the third person.
   ‘I’m short-sighted,’ I told him despondently.
   The midshipman placed a lean hand on my shoulder. ‘Let’s go to
Kreshchatik.’
   We walked side by side. I didn’t dare to look up and kept my eyes on his
stout boots, which had been polished to an impossible shine.
   When we reached Kreshchatik the midshipman led me into Café
Semadeni and ordered two pistachio ice creams and two glasses of water.
We sat down to eat our ice cream at a small three-legged marble table. The
marble was very cold and covered with scribbled figures: brokers from the
stock exchange gathered at Semadeni and counted their profits and losses
on the tables. We ate our ice cream in silence. The midshipman took from
his wallet a photograph of a magnificent corvette fully rigged and with a
large funnel. He handed it to me and said: ‘Keep it as a memento. This is
my ship. I sailed on her to Liverpool.’
   He gave me a firm handshake and left. I sat a while longer until the
sweaty businessmen in their boaters started to stare. I got up and stumbled
out and then ran all the way back to Mariinsky Park. The bench was empty.
Galya had gone. I realised that the midshipman had felt sorry for me and
learned for the first time that pity leaves a bitter feeling in one’s heart.
   After that encounter the desire to become a sailor tormented me for many
years. I yearned for the sea. I had seen it once when I visited Novorossiisk
with my father for a few days. But that, of course, had not been enough. For
hours I would sit with my atlas, studying the coastlines of the oceans and
looking up obscure ports, capes, islands and estuaries. I dreamed up a
complicated game. I created a long list of steamers with important-sounding
names: North Star, Walter Scott, Khingan, Sirius. The list grew daily. I had
become the owner of the largest fleet in the world.
   It goes without saying that I sat in my own shipping office, enveloped in
cigar smoke and surrounded by colourful posters and sailing schedules. My
large windows looked out onto the quay, quite naturally. The steamers’
yellow masts clanked from the rhythmic rocking of the water, and I could
see the elms swaying in the gentle sea breeze. Smoke from the ships wafted
through the open windows and mixed with the smell of old brine and fresh,
new matting. I plotted the most astonishing routes for my ships. They
visited every possible corner of the globe. They even sailed to the islands of
Tristan da Cunha. I switched the steamers from one route to another. I
followed my ships’ sailings and always knew exactly where they were at
any moment, be it the Admiral Istomin, for example, loading bananas in
Singapore on the same day that the Flying Dutchman was unloading flour
in the Faroe Islands. Running such an enormous shipping operation
required a great deal of information. And so, I pored over guidebooks,
nautical reference works and anything else that had the remotest connection
with the sea.
   It was then I heard the word ‘meningitis’ from Mama for the first time.
‘Lord knows what all your games will lead to,’ Mama said. ‘As long as it
doesn’t end with meningitis.’
   I had heard that meningitis was a disease that struck young boys who
learned to read at too young an age, and so I just laughed at Mama’s fears.
It ended, in fact, with my parents’ decision to spend our summer holiday at
the sea. Now I realise that Mama had hoped this would cure me of my
extraordinary infatuation with the sea. She thought that, as usually happens,
I would be disappointed after encountering the reality of my dreams,
dreams which I had been chasing with so much passion. And she was right,
but only partially.


1 Semën Nadson (1862–87), popular poet at the turn of the twentieth
century.

                             OceanofPDF.com
11
What Paradise Looks Like



One day Mama solemnly announced that in a few days we were all leaving
to spend the summer holiday on the Black Sea in the small town of
Gelendzhik near Novorossiisk. She could not have picked a better place
than Gelendzhik to cure me of my infatuation for the sea and the south.
   In those days Gelendzhik was a terribly hot, dusty little town devoid of
greenery. The vegetation for many kilometres around had been destroyed by
the savage Novorossiisk wind, the so-called North-Easter. Nothing but
Jerusalem thorn and stunted acacias with parched little flowers grew in the
gardens. The high mountains radiated stifling heat. At the end of the bay a
cement factory belched smoke.
   But Gelendzhik Bay itself was lovely. Large jellyfish, like pink and blue
flowers, swam in its warm and clear waters. Spotted flounders and pop-
eyed bullheads lay on its sandy bottom. The surf tossed up onto the beach
red seaweed, the broken remnants of fishing nets, and bits of dark green
glass from old bottles worn smooth by the action of the waves. Even after
Gelendzhik the sea lost none of its charm for me. It simply became more
ordinary and so more beautiful than my exquisite dreams.
   In Gelendzhik I became friends with an elderly boatman by the name of
Anastas. He was Greek, from the town of Volos. He had a new sailing boat,
white with a red hull and a latticed deck that he had buffed to a high sheen.
Anastas took summer residents out for trips on his boat. He was known for
his skill and steadiness as a sailor, and so Mama sometimes let me go out
alone with Anastas.
   Once Anastas and I sailed out of the bay into the open sea. I shall never
forget the terror and joy I felt when the sail filled with air and our boat
heeled so far over that the water slapped against the gunwales. We crashed
into enormous, thundering waves, translucently green and covering our
faces with salty spray. I grabbed the shrouds and wished I were back on
shore, but Anastas, clamping down on the pipe between his teeth, just
hummed to himself and then said: ‘Oh, what nice shoes you have! How
much did your mother pay for them?’ He nodded at my chuvyaki, soft
leather shoes popular in the Caucasus.
   My legs were shaking. I didn’t say a word. Anastas yawned and said:
‘It’s nothing! Just a little shower, and a warm one at that. You’ll have a
good appetite after this. Your mama and papa won’t have to beg you to
finish your dinner!’
   He turned the sailing boat around with ease. It shipped water, and we
sailed back towards the bay, diving and leaping through the waves which
passed under our stern with a menacing roar. Horror-struck, I felt my heart
stop.
   All of a sudden Anastas began singing. I immediately stopped shaking,
transfixed by this puzzling song:

       From Batumi to Sukhumi – Ai-vai-vai!
       From Sukhumi to Batumi – Ai-vai-vai!
       A boy did run, with his toy – Ai-vai-vai!
       But down he fell and broke his toy – Ai-vai-vai!

   We furled our sail to this tune and glided up to the pier where Mama was
waiting for me, pale as a sheet. Anastas lifted me out of the boat and onto
the pier and then said: ‘He’s good and salty for you, madame. Got his sea
legs now, he has.’
   Another day my father hired a carriage and we drove out to
Mikhailovsky Pass. At first the flinty road wound its way up the barren,
dusty mountain slopes. We crossed bridges over ravines without so much as
a drop of water. All day long the same grey, dry, cotton-wool clouds clung
to the mountain peaks. I was thirsty. The red-headed Cossack driver turned
around and told me to wait until we reached the pass and there I’d find
plenty of refreshing, cool water to quench my thirst. I didn’t believe him.
The dry, waterless mountains frightened me. I looked with longing on the
dark, watery strip of sea below us. You couldn’t drink it, but at least one
could bathe in its cool waters. The road climbed ever higher. Suddenly, I
felt cool air on my face.
   ‘The pass!’ said the driver. He stopped the horses, climbed down, and
secured the carriage with some metal blocks under the wheels.
   Over the ridge we saw enormous, dense forests stretching across the
mountains to the horizon. Here and there red granite cliffs poked through
the greenery, and far off in the distance I could see the summit blazing with
ice and snow.
   ‘The North-Easter doesn’t reach this far,’ said the driver. ‘It’s paradise up
here.’
   The carriage started to descend. All of a sudden, we found ourselves in a
dark shadow. We could hear coming from the impenetrable forest the rush
of water, bird calls and the sound of leaves ruffled by the troubled midday
wind. The farther we descended the denser became the forest and the darker
the shadows upon the road. Soon a small, clear stream appeared on the side
of the road. It had a bed of coloured stones and was bordered by purple
flowers which the rushing water tugged at and bent but was unable to rip
free of the stony ground and sweep downstream into the gorge.
   Mama scooped a cupful of water from the stream and gave it to me to
drink. The water was so cold the outside of the cup was quickly covered
with condensation.
   ‘It smells of ozone,’ said Father.
   I took a deep breath. I didn’t recognise the smell, but it seemed to me as
if I had been covered in heaps of rain-soaked twigs. Vines of clematis
plucked at our hair. Small fluffy flowers poking out here and there from
cracks in the road gazed with curiosity at our carriage and the grey horses,
who, as if on parade, held their heads high and stepped ever so carefully so
as not to lose control on the steep incline and crash.
   ‘There’s a lizard!’ said Mama.
   ‘Where?’
   ‘Over there. See the nut tree? Just to the left there’s a red rock in the
grass. Look just a bit farther. Do you see the yellow flower? That’s an
azalea. And a tad to the right of the azalea, near the beech tree lying on the
ground. Do you see the shaggy reddish root poking out of the dry earth and
the tiny blue flowers? It’s right there.’
   I spotted the lizard, but only after my eyes had soaked up the sight of the
nut tree, the red rock, the flowers of the azalea and the fallen beech.
   So, this is the Caucasus! I thought.
   ‘It’s a paradise!’ said the driver once again as he turned off the main road
onto a narrow, grassy path cut into the woods. ‘We’ll stop up ahead and go
for a swim.’
    The path through the thicket narrowed. Branches began slapping us in the
face, and so we had to stop the carriage, climb down and continue on foot.
The carriage followed slowly after us. We came to a clearing in the middle
of a green gorge. Tall clumps of dandelions poked out of the thick grass like
white islands. In the shadow of some large beech trees we spied an empty
old barn alongside a noisy mountain stream. The clear water eddied over
the stones, gurgling and bubbling as it flowed.
    While the driver unharnessed the horses and went to fetch fire-wood with
my father, we washed in the river. After the cold water our faces felt even
hotter. We wanted to go exploring up the river, but Mama had spread a
blanket on the grass and unpacked the provisions and said that she was not
about to let us go anywhere until we had eaten. I gave in and sat down to
eat a ham sandwich and cold rice pudding, but it turned out I had gulped
down my food for no good reason. The obstinate copper tea kettle simply
refused to boil on the fire, most likely because the water from the stream
was as cold as ice.
    Then, all of a sudden, the kettle boiled over and put out the fire. We
drank the strong tea in a hurry and began pestering Father to finish so we
could go and explore the woods. The driver said to be careful because there
were a lot of wild boar in the forest. He told us that should we come across
small holes dug in the ground, this was a sign they had been sleeping in the
area. Mama started to worry, although she couldn’t go with us since
vigorous walks left her short of breath, but the driver calmed her down,
saying that the boar only attacked people if they were provoked.
    We headed off upstream. Pushing through the thicket, we stopped along
the way to point out to each other the blue sparks of trout swimming in the
river’s granite pools, or enormous green insects with long antennae, or
foamy, thrashing waterfalls, or horsetails taller than ourselves, or carpets of
wood anemones and peony-filled glades. Borya stumbled upon a small
dusty hole, shaped something like a baby’s bath. We carefully went around
it. Most likely it was the bed for some wild boar.
    Father had walked on ahead. He started calling to us. We struggled
through buckthorn and made our way around some massive, mossy
boulders before eventually catching up with him. He was standing near a
strange structure covered with brambles. We could make out four massive,
smoothly hewn rocks standing upright, with a fifth over the top of them like
a roof. It was some sort of stone house. In one of the sides an opening had
been cut, but it was so small that even I couldn’t squeeze through it. There
were several other such stone structures nearby.
    ‘They’re dolmens,’ said my father. ‘Ancient tombs of the Scythians. But
then again, maybe they weren’t tombs. Scholars still aren’t certain who
built these dolmens, why they built them, or even how.’
    I was certain that these dolmens were the homes of a long extinct race of
dwarflike people. But I didn’t say that to my father. Borya was with us, and
I knew he’d laugh at me. We returned to Gelendzhik burnt by the sun and
drunk with fatigue and forest air. I fell asleep, yet through my slumber I
could feel the hot air on my body and heard the distant roar of the sea.
    After that I imagined that I was the owner of yet another magnificent
land – the Caucasus. I lost myself in Lermontov, in the fierce mountain
tribesmen, in Shamil.1 Once again, Mama began to worry.
    Now, as a grown man, I recall my childhood enthusiasms with gratitude.
They taught me a lot. What’s more, I never was one of those overly excited
little boys, loud and spittle-mouthed and disturbing everyone’s peace. No, I
was quite shy and kept my passions to myself.


1Imam Shamil (1797–1871), political and spiritual leader of the northern
Caucasus who led the military resistance to Russian expansion.

                             OceanofPDF.com
12
The Forests of Bryansk



In the autumn of 1902, I was to enrol in the preparatory class of the First
Kiev Gymnasium. My elder brother Vadim was already a pupil there, and
having heard his stories about the school I was afraid to go, and sometimes
even cried and begged my mother to let me stay at home.
   ‘Do you really want to be an extern?’ Mama asked in a startled voice.
‘Extern’ was the name for a boy who studied at home and only visited the
school once a year to take examinations. From my two brothers I knew well
the nightmarish fate of these externs. They were deliberately failed in their
exams, humiliated in every way, and expected to know much more than the
regular schoolboys. The externs could not look to anyone for help – no one
would even prompt them. I pictured these boys exhausted from cramming,
their eyes all cried out, and their ears blood red with anxiety. It was a pitiful
image. I gave in.
   ‘Well, all right,’ I said. ‘I won’t be an extern.’
   ‘Cry baby! Little mama’s boy!’ yelled Borya from his room.
   ‘Don’t you dare hurt his feelings!’ Mama seethed. She considered Borya
heartless and could never understand why he was so hard and unfeeling.
Obviously, it was from our Turkish grandmother. Everyone else in the
family was exceptionally sensitive, affectionate and impractical.
   My father knew of my worries, tears and anxieties, and found, as always,
an unexpected remedy for my miseries. After a minor row with my mother,
he decided to send me on my own to her brother, Uncle Nikolai
Grigorievich. This was the very same Uncle Kolya, the cheerful cadet, who
would come from St Petersburg to visit Grandmother in Cherkassy and
loved to waltz with Aunt Nadya. Now he was a military engineer, married,
and stationed in the town of Bryansk in Orël province, where he worked at
an antiquated factory called the Arsenal that produced gun-carriages. Uncle
Kolya had taken a dacha for the summer near Bryansk on the old rundown
Rëvny estate in the Bryansk forest and invited us all to come and visit. My
parents accepted, but they could not come until after my sister and brothers
had completed their exams, and so I was sent on ahead by myself.
   ‘Let him get used to being on his own,’ Father said. ‘It’s good for such
shy little boys.’
   He wrote Uncle Kolya a letter. What it said I don’t know. Mama,
furtively wiping away her tears, packed a small suitcase for me that had
everything I might need, including a note with a list of dos and don’ts. They
bought me a second-class ticket to the station of Sinezërki. From there it
was ten versts to my uncle’s dacha. Everyone, even Borya, saw me off at
the station. My father said something to the grey-haired conductor and gave
him some money.
   ‘I’ll see he gets there safe and sound,’ the conductor said to Mama. ‘You
have no cause to worry, madam.’
   Mama asked the passengers in my compartment to keep an eye on me
and not let me leave the train at the stations along the way. They willingly
agreed. I was terribly embarrassed and kept tugging on Mama’s sleeve. At
the second whistle they all kissed me goodbye, even Borya, who then
sneaked in when no one was looking what we called a ‘pear’ – a painful
thump with his thumb on the top of my head. Then they left the train, all
except Mama, that is, who couldn’t leave. She held my hands.
   ‘Be a good boy, understand?’ she said. ‘A good, sensible boy. And be
very careful!’
   She looked at me with searching eyes. The third whistle sounded. She
hugged me and made quickly for the exit, her skirts rustling behind her. She
jumped down as the train began to pull out. Father caught her in his arms
and shook his head.
   I stood at the closed window and watched as Mama walked swiftly down
the platform ahead of the others, and only then did I realise how pretty she
was, how petite, how tender. My tears fell onto the dusty window frame.
Long after Mama and the platform were gone, I still stood at the window,
looking out as the sidings, goods trains and screeching shunting engines
rushed past and the new Gothic-style Catholic church being built on
Vasilkovskaya Street appeared and then seemed to rotate before my eyes. I
was afraid to turn round and show the other passengers my tear-stained
face. Then I remembered that a telegram had been sent to Uncle Kolya
about my arrival. A sense of pride that I had been deemed worthy of a real
telegram calmed me a bit, and I turned round.
   The compartment was upholstered in red velvet. It was small and cosy.
Tiny reflections of sunlight darted from one corner of the dusty
compartment to the other, as if on command, and then back again, while the
train broke free of the tangled outskirts of Kiev and rocked from side to side
along a series of curves. They’d put me in a compartment reserved for
ladies. Mama had insisted on it. I cautiously examined my fellow
passengers. One of them, a dark and withered Frenchwoman, gave me a few
quick nods, smiled, exposing a mouth of horsy teeth, and offered me a box
of candied fruit. I didn’t know what to do, but thanked her and took one. It
made my hands all sticky.
   ‘Quick, put it in your mouth!’ said a girl of about sixteen in a brown
school uniform with cheerful, slanting eyes. ‘Stop thinking and eat it!’
   The Frenchwoman, evidently her governess, said something to her in
French in a stern voice. The schoolgirl made a face, and with that the
governess launched into a long and angry tirade, the words flying out of her.
The schoolgirl didn’t wait to hear the end, but got up and went out into the
corridor.
   ‘Young people nowadays!’ said a short, fat old woman with a mouth like
a bagel. Indeed, behind her hung a string bag full of bagels sprinkled with
poppy seeds. ‘Oh, I just can’t bear these young people!’
   ‘Yes, yes!’ nodded the Frenchwoman. ‘Nothing but disobedience. Just fif
and whims!’
   I didn’t know what ‘fif’ meant, but guessed it was something bad
because the old woman raised her eyes to the ceiling and let out such a loud
sigh that even the Frenchwoman gave her a look. I wanted to look out, so I
went into the corridor. The schoolgirl was already there, standing by an
open window.
   ‘Ah, Vitya!’ she said to me. ‘Come here, we’ll look out together.’
   ‘I’m not Vitya,’ I said, blushing.
   ‘Never mind, come here.’
   I climbed up onto the radiator and stuck my head out of the window. The
train was crossing the Dnieper. I could see the Pechersk Monastery and
Kiev off in the distance and the shallows of the Dnieper where it had
deposited islands of sand alongside the foundations of the bridge.
   ‘Beastly old witch!’ said the girl. ‘Madame Demi-Femme! But you
needn’t be afraid of her. She’s actually quite a nice old lady.’
   This first trip on my own wore me out, mostly since I spent almost the
whole time standing by the open window. But I was happy. For the first
time I experienced the freedom of travel when one has nothing to think
about and nothing to do but look through the window at the fields of rye,
the woods, the small stations where the barefoot peasant women sold their
milk, at the little streams, the signalmen, the station masters in their dusty
red caps, the geese, and the village boys who’d run after the train shouting:
‘Uncle, toss me a kopeck!’
   In those days it was a long, roundabout route to Bryansk – through Lvov
and Navlya. The train didn’t get to Sinezërki until the third day. The train
was in no hurry, it rested at each station for a good long while, puffing
beside the water tower. The passengers would hop off and run to the buffet
for hot water for their tea or to buy fresh strawberries and roast chicken
from the peasant women. After that, everyone would settle down. Long
after it was time to depart, a sleepy stillness reigned over the station, the hot
sun burned, the clouds drifted, dragging behind them their dark blue
shadows over the ground, the passengers dozed in the carriages, and still the
train just stood there, motionless. The only sound was that of the engine,
sighing and dripping hot oily water onto the sand. At last the fat chief
conductor in his canvas jacket came out of the station, stroked his
moustache, brought a whistle to his lips, and let out a long, loud blast. The
engine made no reply, and just kept on sighing. Then the conductor strolled
lazily over to the engine and blew once more. Still, the engine did not reply.
Only after the third or fourth blast did it finally emit a short, dissatisfied
hoot and slowly begin to move.
   I leaned out of the window because I knew that just beyond the signal
box there would be a slope covered with clover and bluebells and then a
pine forest. Whenever we entered a forest, the clatter of the wheels grew
much louder and was caught up by an echo, just as if blacksmiths had
begun to pound with their hammers throughout the whole forest. I was
seeing central Russia for the first time. I liked it better than Ukraine. It was
wilder, more expansive, more deserted. I liked its forests, its overgrown
roads, the language of the peasants.
   The old woman slept the whole time. The French governess had calmed
down and was crocheting lace, while the girl sang and leaned out of the
window, skilfully tearing leaves from the trees as they flew past. Every
couple of hours she’d get out her basket of provisions, eat for a good long
while, and force me to join her. We ate hard-boiled eggs, grilled chicken
and rice pirozhki, and drank tea.
   Then we’d hang out of the window again and become light-headed from
the scent of the flowering buckwheat. The shadow of the train stumbled
over the fields, and the orange light of the setting sun flooded the carriage
such that in our compartment, consumed by a fiery haze, we couldn’t make
out a thing.
   The train arrived at Sinezërki at dusk. The conductor carried my suitcase
out to the platform. I was expecting either Uncle Kolya or Aunt Marusya to
meet me. But there was no one on the platform. I could see the women in
my compartment begin to worry. The train stopped at Sinezërki only for a
minute. Then it was gone, and I remained there with my suitcase. I was
certain that Uncle Kolya was just running late and would arrive at any
moment. A bearded peasant in a jacket and a black peaked cap, with a whip
stuck in the top of his boot, hobbled up to me. He smelled of horse sweat
and hay.
   ‘You wouldn’t be Kostik, would you?’ he asked. ‘I’ve been waiting for
you. Your uncle, the Captain, ordered me to meet you and bring you back
safe and sound. Give me your little bag there, let’s go.’
   This was the final test my father had prepared for me. In his letter he’d
written to Uncle Kolya that no one from the family should be there to meet
me at Sinezërki. Still muttering something about my uncle, the driver – his
name was Nikita – settled me on the cart’s soft hay, which was covered by a
thick canvas, untied the horses’ oat-filled nosebags, climbed on, and off we
went. At first we drove for a long time through darkening fields, then the
road wound upward through the woods. Sometimes the cart rattled over a
wooden bridge, black swamp water glistening below. The air was damp and
smelled of sedge. A lifeless purple moon rose over the woods and the
stunted thickets, a bittern called. Nikita said: ‘It’s a wild, wooded country
around here – not many folks about. Lots of bark and water. No place
smells better in all of Orël province.’
   We drove into a pine wood and then descended a steep hill to a river. The
pines blotted out the moon and it grew dark. Voices could be heard on the
road. I began to feel a little scared.
   ‘Is that you, Nikita?’ my uncle’s familiar voice called from the darkness.
   ‘Whoa-oa!’ Nikita yelled with a note of desperation as he struggled to
rein in the horses. ‘Of course it’s us. Whoa! May the Devil take you all!’
   Someone grabbed me and then lifted me out of the cart. In the faint
afterglow I caught sight of the laughing eyes and white teeth of Uncle
Kolya. He kissed me and then quickly handed me over to Aunt Marusya.
She snuggled me like a baby, chuckling with a deep laugh, and gave off the
aroma of vanilla – she must have come straight from baking something
sweet. We climbed back into the cart and set off, Nikita walking beside us.
We crossed an old black bridge over a deep, clear river full of reeds, and
then a second bridge. A fish splashed loudly underneath it. The cart bumped
up against a stone gatepost and finally we drove into an old park that was so
dark it seemed the tops of the tall trees were lost amid the stars. In the very
depths of the park, under a canopy of pitch-black lime trees, the cart came
to a halt alongside a small wooden house whose windows were all alight.
Two dogs, one white, the other black – Mordan and Chetvertak – began
barking and jumped up trying to lick my face.
   I spent the entire summer at the old estate of Rëvny amid the dense
Bryansk forests, the rivers and the gentle peasants of Orël province, in that
ancient park that was so vast no one knew where it ended and the forest
began. This was to be the last summer of my true childhood.
   School started in the autumn, and then our family fell apart. I wound up
alone. Before leaving school, I was already earning my own living and felt
like a true grown-up. Ever since that summer I have been attached to central
Russia with all my heart. I know of no other land that possesses such
enormous lyrical power and such touching scenic beauty – with all its
melancholy, peace and expansiveness. It’s difficult to measure the depth of
this love. Everyone experiences it for themselves. You love every blade of
grass, sparkling with dew or warmed by the sun, every cup of water drawn
from a forest well, every sapling bent over a lake, its leaves somehow
trembling in the calm air, every crow of the cock, and every cloud floating
high across the pale sky. And if at times I wish to live to be one hundred
and twenty, as old Nechipor had once predicted, then it’s only because one
lifetime is not enough to experience all the beauty and healing power of the
Russian land.
   My childhood was ending. It’s so sad that we only begin to understand all
the wonder of childhood as we’re becoming adults. In childhood everything
was different. We looked upon the world with clear light eyes, and
everything appeared brighter. The sun was brighter, the fields were more
fragrant, the thunder was louder, the rains were heavier, the grass was taller.
And our hearts were bigger, our grief was bitterer, and a thousand-fold more
mysterious was the land, our native land – the most magnificent gift of our
lives. We need to tend to it, to care for and to protect it with all the strength
we possess.

                               OceanofPDF.com
13
The Swarm



Unlike other boys, I had never envied Kiev officer cadets, who wore white
shoulder boards decorated with yellow ciphers and stood at attention before
the generals. Nor did I envy the boys at the gymnasium, even though their
greatcoats of grey officers’ cloth with silver buttons were considered very
splendid. Since my youth I had been indifferent to all uniforms, except
those worn by the men in the navy.
   When, in the autumn of 1902, I first put on long trousers and a school
uniform jacket, I didn’t feel like myself at all for a time. It was awkward
and uncomfortable. I’d become some other boy altogether with that heavy
military hat on my head. I took such a strong dislike to those stiff, blue hats
with their enormous insignia because they made the ears of all my
comrades – pupils of the preparatory class – stick straight out. When they
took the hats off, their ears would go back to normal. But as soon as they
had to put them back on, out went their ears again. It was as if they’d been
made especially for this purpose so it would be easier for Inspector
Bodyansky to grab some poor first-year pupil by the ear as he shouted at
him: ‘Late again, misérable! Go and stand in the corner and reflect on your
bitter fate!’
   So, as soon as Mama bought me my hat, I did as my older brothers had
done and removed the small metal hoop on the inside and tore out the satin
lining. Such was the school tradition – the shabbier the hat, the more valiant
the boy. ‘Only swots and lickspittles go around in new hats,’ my brothers
said. You were supposed to sit on your hat, to carry it around in your
pocket, to use it to knock chestnuts out of the trees. Only then did it acquire
that battle-worn look that was the pride of every true schoolboy. My parents
also bought me a satchel with a smooth deer-hide backing, a pencil case,
ruled exercise books and several small preparatory textbooks. Then Mama
took me to school.
   Grandmother Vikentia Ivanovna was staying with us at the time in Kiev.
She made the sign of the cross over me and hung a small crucifix on a cold
chain around my neck. With shaking hands, she undid the collar of my
black jacket, stuck the cross under my shirt, and then turned away and
pressed her handkerchief to her eyes. ‘Off you go!’ she said in a faint voice,
giving me a gentle push. ‘Be a good boy, work hard!’
   Mama and I left. I kept looking back at our house as we walked, as if I
were being led away for the last time. We were then living on the shady and
quiet Nikolsko-Botanicheskaya Street. Massive chestnut trees stood
pensively around our house. They had already begun to drop their dry, five-
pointed leaves. It was a typical autumn day in Kiev – sunny, very blue and
warm – although with cool shadows. Grandmother stood at the window
nodding to me until we turned onto Tarasovskaya Street. Mama walked
along in silence.
   When we reached Nikolaevskaya Square and I caught sight of the yellow
school building through the greenery, I burst into tears. I must have realised
that my childhood was over, that now I would have to work and that this
work would be bitter and long and not at all like those peaceful days I had
had at home. I stopped and buried my face in my mother’s side, and cried
so hard that the pencil case in my satchel bobbed up and down as if it were
asking what had happened to its young owner.
   Mama removed my hat and dried my tears with a scented handkerchief.
‘Stop it,’ she said. ‘Do you think it’s easy for me? But you must.’
   You must! No words had ever hit me harder up until then than these two
words spoken by Mama. ‘You must.’
   The older I grew, the more often I heard grown-ups say that this is ‘the
way you must live’. For a long time I refused to accept this and kept asking
these grown-ups: ‘Why can’t a man live as he wants to and must live only
as others want him to?’ They always answered that I shouldn’t concern
myself with things I didn’t understand. And Mama even once said to my
father: ‘This is all the result of that anarchist upbringing you’ve been giving
him.’ My father drew me close, pressed my head to his white waistcoat, and
said with a smile: ‘They don’t understand us in this house, Kostik.’
   After I had settled down and stopped crying, we entered the school. A
wide iron staircase, rubbed to the sheen of lead by so many feet, led
upwards towards a terrible din similar to an angry buzzing beehive. ‘Don’t
be frightened. It’s only the break,’ Mama said to me.
   We began to climb the stairs. For the first time, Mama let go of my hand.
Two senior boys came rushing down the stairs. They made way for us, and
one of them said as we passed: ‘They’ve brought in another miserable little
swarmer.’
   And so I joined the ranks of the anxious and defenceless preparatory
class or, as the older boys called us with disdain, the swarm. They called us
by this name since being small and quick, we’d scurry about and get caught
up in their feet during the breaks.
   Mama and I passed through the white Assembly Hall with its portraits of
the emperors. I especially remember Alexander I. He was holding a green
tricorn against his thigh. Reddish whiskers bristled on the sides of his feline
face. I didn’t like him, despite the cavalry-men with plumed hats galloping
over the hills behind his back. We passed through the hall to the office of
Inspector Bodyansky – a corpulent man whose uniform frock coat was as
roomy as a lady’s house-coat. Bodyansky laid a pudgy hand on my head
and then thought for a long time before saying: ‘Work hard or I’ll gobble
you up!’
   Mama forced a smile. Bodyansky summoned the proctor, Kazimir, and
ordered him to take me to the preparatory class. Mama gave me a nod, and
Kazimir took me by the shoulder and led me down the long corridors.
Kazimir squeezed me so tightly it seemed he was afraid that I’d break free
and run back to Mama.
   Lessons were under way in the classrooms. The corridors were empty
and quiet. The silence was particularly striking after the frenzied din during
the break. Dust from the commotion still hung in the air, floating in the rays
of sunlight from the garden. The century-old garden of the First Kiev
Gymnasium was famous, as big as a park, taking up an entire city block. I
looked out of the window into the garden and once more felt like crying.
The sun shone through the chestnut trees. The dried, pale violet leaves of
the poplars stirred in the breeze.
   Even then, as a boy, I loved gardens and trees. I never broke off branches
or destroyed birds’ nests. Perhaps that was because Grandmother Vikentia
Ivanovna always told me that ‘the world is a marvellous wonder and people
ought to live and labour in it as if it were one big garden’. Kazimir noticed I
was about to start crying and he dug out of the back pocket of his old but
clean coat a sticky sweet. Giving it to me, he said in a Polish accent: ‘Eat
this sweet during the next break.’
   I thanked him in a whisper and took the sweet.
   The first days of school I always spoke in a whisper and was too afraid to
lift my head. Everything overwhelmed me – the bearded teachers in their
blue frock coats, the old vaulted ceilings, the echoes down the endless
corridors, and, finally, Director Bessmertny – a handsome older man with a
golden beard and a brand new frock coat. He was a mild, enlightened man,
but for some reason we all felt he was to be feared. Perhaps it was because
he sat in a large office, with moulded ceilings, a red rug and a portrait of
Surgeon Pirogov.1 The director rarely left his office. According to the rules
of the school, we always stopped to bow when we saw him, whereas the
teachers we simply greeted in passing.
   Kazimir and I continued to make our way down the echoing corridors.
Supervisors patrolled the halls, looking in on the classrooms through glass
transoms over the doors. There was ‘The Melon’, ‘The Dolt’, ‘Snuff’ and
Platon Fëdorovich, the only one of them we liked. The preparatory class
was in the corridor ruled by Platon Fëdorovich, and this saved me in the
beginning from many unpleasantnesses. The supervisors were charged with
monitoring the comportment of the schoolboys and informing the inspector
of the slightest infraction. These warranted a number of punishments –
detention for an hour or two ‘without dinner’ (in other words, being left to
sit bored and alone in an empty classroom after lessons), a bad conduct
mark or, finally, a call to one’s parents to come in for a meeting with the
director. We feared this last punishment most of all. There were additional
punishments in the upper forms: temporary suspension, expulsion with the
right to apply to another school, and the most terrifying – the so-called
‘Wolf’s ticket’: expulsion without the right to continue your education at
any secondary school.
   I saw only one older boy expelled with a ‘Wolf’s ticket’. I was in the first
form at the time. It was said he had slapped the German teacher, Yagorsky,
a rude man with a green face. Yagorsky had called him a blockhead in front
of the whole class. The boy demanded that Yagorsky apologise. Yagorsky
refused. Then the boy hit him. For this he was expelled with a ‘Wolf’s
ticket’.
   The next day the boy returned to school. None of the supervisors could
make up their minds about whether or not to stop him. He opened the
classroom door, pulled a Browning out of his pocket, and pointed it at
Yagorsky. Yagorsky leapt up from behind his desk and, shielding himself
with his class record book, ran between the desks to hide behind the pupils’
backs. ‘Coward!’ cried the boy, upon which he turned, walked out onto the
landing, and shot himself through the heart.
   The door to our classroom opened onto the landing. We heard a sharp
crash and the rattle of glass. Something fell and rolled down the stairs. Our
form master threw himself towards the door, and we all ran after him. The
freckle-faced boy lay on the stairs. He lifted a hand up and grabbed at the
bannister, then his fingers went limp and he fell still. His eyes, filled with
amused surprise, gazed up at us. The supervisors bustled around the boy.
Then Director Bessmertny hurried up. He knelt down next to him and
opened the boy’s jacket, and then we saw the blood on his shirt. Medical
orderlies from the first-aid service in their brown uniforms and French caps
came running up the stairs and quickly placed the boy on a stretcher.
   ‘Get the boys out of here, now!’ the director instructed our form master.
But apparently, he didn’t hear him, and none of us moved. Yagorsky came
out of the classroom and made for the teacher’s common room, slouching
and his head down. As he walked, the director called after him: ‘Get out!’
   Yagorsky turned round.
   ‘Get out of my school!’ the director told him in a low voice. Yagorsky
ran off, cowering, down the corridor.
   The next day Mama didn’t want me to go to school, but then changed her
mind, and I went. Our teachers released us after the second period. They
told us that those boys who wanted could attend our schoolmate’s funeral.
We all went – small and frightened in our long overcoats with our stiff
satchels hanging from our shoulders. The day was cold and foggy. The
whole school followed the coffin. There were lots of flowers in it. The
director led a grey, poorly dressed woman by the arm – the boy’s mother. At
the time I still had little understanding of such significant moments, yet
somehow I understood that life had given us our first lesson in
comradeship. One by one we approached the grave and tossed in a handful
of earth, as if we were swearing to always be kind and fair to each other.

                                      •

But this was all much later, and for now Kazimir led me to the preparatory
class. Behind his desk sat Nazarenko, the form master – a man with a loud
voice and a wavy blue beard like some ancient Assyrian ruler, a King
Sennacherib or Harharu. The older boys swore he worked for the Okhranka
and so they called him He-Hear-You.2
   All that year, until we moved up to the first form, Nazarenko tormented
us little ones with his bellowing voice and taunts, with bad marks and
stories about how he had had his ingrown toenails cut out. I feared and
hated him. I hated him mostly for these stories about his toenails. I took my
seat at a low desk, its top heavily scarred by a penknife. I found it hard to
breathe. Our ink reeked of acid. Nazarenko was dictating: ‘One day the
swan, the crayfish and the pike . . .’ Outside the open window a sparrow
with a dry maple leaf in its beak perched on a branch. I wished to trade my
fate with the sparrow’s. It looked at us through the window, let out a
plaintive squeak, and dropped the leaf.
   ‘New boy!’ he roared. ‘Get out your exercise book, start writing and stop
looking round, if you don’t want to go without dinner!’
   I got out my exercise book and started to write. A tear dropped onto my
blotter. Then my neighbour, a dark-haired boy with bright eyes, Emmanuel
(known as Emma) Shmukler, whispered: ‘Swallow your spit, you’ll feel
better.’
   I swallowed my spit but felt no better. For a long while I couldn’t even
draw a deep breath. So began my first year of school: dust, racing to class
during the breaks, the constant fear of being called to the blackboard, ink-
stained hands, my heavy satchel, and, like the echoes of a former life, the
melodious ringing of the Kiev trams outside the windows, the far-off
wheeze of the street organ, and the hoots of the locomotives from the
station. From there the big trains raced off in clouds of steam on their way
through woods and fields of stubble, while we, bent over our desks, choked
on chalk dust wiped from the blackboard with a dry sponge.
   Our classroom was connected to the physics laboratory by way of a
narrow door. We often looked inside during breaks. It was arranged in the
shape of an amphitheatre with benches that rose almost to the ceiling. The
older boys were led to the laboratory for their lessons. We, quite naturally,
swarmed under their feet in the corridor and they must have got tired of
this. Once one of the older boys, a tall, pale fellow, let out a long whistle.
Immediately, they began to grab us swarmers one by one and drag us into
the physics laboratory. They took their places on benches, holdings us
firmly between their knees. At first we liked this. We gazed with curiosity
at the mysterious instruments on the shelves – black discs, retorts and brass
spheres. Then the first bell rang in the corridor. We tried to break free, but
the older boys wouldn’t let us go. They held us tightly, and those who
struggled the most to escape received the dreaded ‘pear’. It really hurt.
   There was a second, ominous ringing of the bell. We tried even harder to
get away, struggling with all our might, pleading and crying, but the older
boys did not yield. The pale boy stood by the door. His classmates yelled at
him: ‘Make sure you time it just right!’ We didn’t know what was
happening. We howled with fear. At any moment the bell would ring a third
time. Nazarenko would burst into our empty classroom. His rage would be
terrifying. Rivers of our tears would not calm it. The third bell. We let out a
horrendous roar. The pale boy raised his arm. This was the signal that the
physics teacher had entered the far end of the corridor. He walked
unhurriedly, cautiously, listening to the screams emanating from the physics
laboratory.
   The physics teacher was very fat. He had to turn sideways to squeeze
through the narrow door. The older boys’ prank was built upon this very
fact. As soon as the teacher had wedged himself into the doorway, the pale
youth dropped his arm. We were let go and now, in our crazed state, rushed
blindly with tears streaming down our faces out of the physics laboratory
towards our classroom. We crashed like a wave into the frightened teacher.
For a moment, an agitated whirlpool of boys’ cropped heads swirled at the
door. And then we ejected the teacher out of the door and into the corridor
like a popped cork, pushed our way through his legs, and tore into our
classroom. Fortunately, Nazarenko had been detained in the teachers’ room
and did not notice a thing.
   The older boys managed to pull off this treacherous trick only once. After
that, we were more careful. From then on when they came out into the
corridor, we immediately hid in our room, closed the door, and barricaded
the entrance with our desks. This little game, which had cost us so many
tears, had been the idea of the pale youth. His name was Bagrov.3 A few
years later he fired a revolver at the tsar’s minister Stolypin at the Kiev
Opera House, killing him, for which he was hanged. At his trial, Bagrov
displayed calm indifference. When the sentence was read, he said: ‘I don’t
care in the least whether I live to eat another two thousand steaks or not.’
   There was a lot of talk among the grown-ups about whether or not
Bagrov had really been a revolutionary or in fact an agent of the Okhranka
who’d organised the murder of Stolypin in order to please the tsar (Nicholas
hated Stolypin because he’d been unable to resist his minister’s superior
will). My father always insisted that no man capable of pronouncing such
cynical words while facing death as had Bagrov could ever be a
revolutionary.


1   Nikolai Pirogov (1810–81), pioneering physician and surgeon.
2The Department for Protecting Public Security and Order, the tsarist secret
police, known by the acronym Okhranka or Okhrana.
3 Dmitry Bagrov (1887–1911), anarchist revolutionary as well as under-
cover agent for the Okhranka, hanged for the assassination of Prime
Minister Pëtr Stolypin.

                              OceanofPDF.com
14
Water from the Limpopo



On    the table in our classroom stood a row of sealed bottles filled with
yellowish water. Every bottle had a label on it. An old, uneven hand had
written on the labels: ‘Water from the Nile’, ‘Water from the River
Limpopo’, ‘Water from the Mediterranean’.
   There were many bottles. They held water from the Volga, the Rhine and
the Thames, the Dead Sea, the Amazon and Lake Michigan. No matter how
long we stared at the bottles, all the water looked equally yellow and
boring. We pestered our geography teacher, Cherpunov, to allow us to taste
the water from the Dead Sea. We wanted to find out if it really was that
salty. But Cherpunov never allowed us to. Small, with a long grey beard
practically down to his knees, and slits for eyes, Cherpunov looked like a
wizard. It was with good reason his nickname was Chernomor after the evil
sorcerer from Pushkin’s Ruslan and Ludmila. Cherpunov was always
bringing curious objects with him to class. Most of all he loved bringing
bottles of water. He told us how he himself had collected the water from the
Nile near Cairo.
   ‘Look how much sediment there is,’ he said, shaking the bottle. ‘This
sediment from the Nile is worth more than diamonds. The culture of Egypt
was built on this mud. Markovsky, tell the class what we mean by the word
“culture”.’
   Markovsky stood up and said that culture was the cultivation of cereals,
raisins and rice.
   ‘Stupid, but there’s a bit of truth in that!’ commented Cherpunov and
began showing us the various bottles. He was particularly proud of the
water from the river Limpopo. A former pupil had sent it to him as a gift.
Cherpunov devised special visual aids to help us remember all sorts of
geographical facts. Once he drew a large ‘A’ on the blackboard. In the right-
hand corner of this ‘A’ he wrote a second, smaller ‘A’ and then a third still
smaller one in it, and in the third, a fourth. And then he said: ‘Now
remember: A is for Asia, Arabia is in Asia, Aden is in Arabia, and in Aden
there sits an Anglo-Saxon.’
   We memorised this immediately and never forgot it for the rest of our
lives.
   The older schoolboys told us that Cherpunov had put together a small
geographical museum in his flat, but the old man would not let anyone see
it. It was said to include a stuffed hummingbird, a butterfly collection, a
telescope and even a nugget of gold. Upon hearing this, I began to organise
my own museum. It was, of course, rather modest, but, in my imagination,
it amounted to a realm of astonishing things. Each object had its own
colourful story behind it – be it a button from the uniform of a Romanian
soldier or a dead praying mantis.
   Once I came upon Cherpunov in the Botanical Gardens. He was sitting
on a bench still wet from the rain and poking the ground with his walking
stick. I doffed my cap and bowed.
   ‘Come here!’ Cherpunov said, holding out a fat hand. ‘Have a seat. Tell
me, what’s this I hear about you organising a small museum? What sort of
things do you have in it?’
   I shyly gave him a list of my simple treasures. Cherpunov smiled. ‘Most
commendable!’ he said. ‘Come and visit me on Sunday morning. You can
have a look at my museum. I don’t doubt that if you devote yourself to such
matters you’ll become a geographer or explorer one day.’
   ‘With my mother?’ I asked.
   ‘Your mother?
   ‘Should I come with my mother?’
   ‘No, why? Come by yourself. Mothers don’t understand the first thing
about geography.’
   On Sunday morning I put on my new school uniform and went to call on
Cherpunov. He lived in the Pechersk neighbourhood in a low outbuilding
located deep inside a courtyard. The building was so overgrown with lilac
bushes that all the rooms were dark. It was late autumn, but the lilacs, wet
with mist, were still green. Down below on the Dnieper the steamers hooted
as they departed Kiev to winter in the south. I climbed the front steps and
saw next to the door a brass plate and round doorbell knob. I pulled on the
knob. I could hear the tinkle of bells inside. Cherpunov opened the door. He
was wearing a thick grey jacket and felt shoes.
   The miracles began right there in the front hall. Reflected in an oval
mirror was a small schoolboy, red with embarrassment, struggling with stiff
fingers to undo the buttons on his coat. It took me some time before I
realised that it was my own reflection. Still struggling with the buttons, I
noticed the mirror’s frame. It wasn’t a frame, but a wreath of delicately
painted glass leaves, flowers and bunches of grapes.
   ‘That’s Venetian glass,’ said Cherpunov, helping me with the last of my
buttons, then taking my coat and hanging it up. ‘Take a close look. You can
even touch it.’
   I carefully touched a glass rose. The glass was opaque, as if it had been
dusted with powder, but a shaft of light from the next room shone through it
with a reddish glow. ‘It’s just like Turkish delight,’ I said.
   ‘Stupid, but there’s a bit of truth in that,’ Cherpunov mumbled.
   I blushed such that even my eyes seemed to turn red. Cherpunov patted
me on the shoulder. ‘Don’t be offended. It’s just a saying of mine. Come.
We’ll have tea together.’
   I hesitated, but Cherpunov took me by the elbow and led me into the
dining room. It was more of a garden than a room. To get to my place at the
table I had to carefully move aside the leaves of a philodendron and some
branches with fragrant red cones dangling from the ceiling. The fronds of a
palm tree hung over the white tablecloth. Vases of pink, yellow and white
flowers crowded the windowsills.
   I took a seat at the table, but immediately jumped up again. A petite
young woman with brilliant grey eyes had come rushing into the room, her
dress swishing as she walked.
   ‘Masha, this is the schoolboy I told you about,’ said Cherpunov, nodding
at me. ‘Georgy Maximovich’s son. He’s embarrassed, quite naturally.’
   The woman held her hand out to me. Her bracelet tinkled. ‘Are you really
going to show him everything, Pëtr Petrovich?’ she asked, smiling as she
scrutinised me.
   ‘Yes, after we’ve had our tea.’
   ‘Then I’ll use that time to walk into town. I want to go to Kirchheim’s
pastry shop for a thing or two.’
   ‘As you wish.’
   The woman poured me a cup of tea with lemon and pushed a plate of
Vienna rolls in front of me. ‘You’ll need to build up your strength before the
lecture,’ she said.
   After tea Cherpunov lit a cigarette. He flicked the ash into a sea-shell
edged with petrified foam of the most delicate pink colour. An exact
duplicate of the shell stood next to it on the table. ‘This shell is from New
Guinea,’ Cherpunov explained.
   ‘All right then, goodbye!’ the young woman said loudly, getting up and
leaving.
   ‘Well now,’ said Cherpunov, following her out with his eyes before
pointing to a portrait on the wall. It depicted a bearded man with an
emaciated face. ‘Do you know who that is? One of Russia’s finest men. The
explorer Miklukho-Maklai.1 He was a great humanist. I don’t suppose you
know what that word means, but that doesn’t matter. You will in time. He
was a great scholar who believed in humanity’s essential goodness. He
lived all by himself, unarmed and dying of fever, among the cannibals of
New Guinea. Yet he managed to do so much good for the savages and he
showed them so much patience and kindness that when our corvette the
Emerald came to bring him back to Russia, crowds came out to the beach in
tears, reaching out their arms to the ship as they cried: “Maklai! Maklai!”
And so, remember: with kindness you can achieve anything and
everything.’
   The woman returned to the dining room and stopped by the doors. She
was wearing a small black hat and was pulling a glove onto her left hand.
   ‘By the way, what is poetry?’ Cherpunov asked out of the blue. ‘Please
don’t even try to give me an answer. There isn’t one. Take this shell from
the island where Maklai lived. If you were to stare at it for a long time,
suddenly it would come to you that one morning long ago the sun landed on
this shell and it will remain on it forever.’
   The woman sat down on a chair by the door and began to take off her
glove. I stared at the shell. For a moment I truly believed that I had fallen
asleep and was seeing the slow dawn and the pink flash of the sun’s rays
over the great translucent expanse of the ocean waters.
   ‘If you press the shell to your ear,’ Cherpunov said from somewhere far
away, ‘you’ll hear a rumbling sound. I can’t tell you why this is. In fact, no
one can. It’s a mystery. Everything that we’re unable to understand we call
a mystery.’
   The woman took off her hat and laid it on her lap.
   ‘Here, listen,’ said Cherpunov.
   I pressed the shell to my hear and heard a sleepy murmur – as if a gentle
surf were breaking on some shore far, far away.
   The woman held out her hand: ‘Let me try. It’s been a long time since I
listened to it.’
   I gave her the shell. She pressed it to her ear, smiled and opened her
mouth just enough for me to see her teeth. They were small, very white and
wet.
   ‘Aren’t you going to Kirchheim’s, Masha?’ Cherpunov asked.
   The woman got up. ‘I’ve changed my mind. I don’t want to go all by
myself. Excuse me if I’ve disturbed you.’ She left the dining room.
   ‘Well, all right then, let’s continue our conversation, young man,’ said
Cherpunov. ‘There are some black boxes over there in the corner. Fetch the
top one, but do be careful about it.’
   I got the box and placed it on the table in front of Cherpunov. The box
turned out to be quite light. Cherpunov slowly removed the lid. I peeped
over his shoulder and let out a shriek. An enormous butterfly, bigger than a
maple leaf, was lying in the box on a piece of dark silk and shimmering like
a rainbow.
   ‘No, that’s not how you’re supposed to look at it!’ he said crossly. ‘Like
this!’ He took me by the crown of my head and began to turn it to the right
and then the left. Each time the butterfly erupted with colour – white, then
gold, then purple, then blue. It was as if its wings were being burned by a
miraculous fire that would never go out.
   ‘A most rare butterfly from the island of Borneo!’ Cherpunov announced
with pride and then replaced the lid.
   Next Cherpunov showed me an astral globe, old maps with different
roses of the winds on them, and a few stuffed hummingbirds with long
beaks like awls.
   ‘Well, that’s enough for today,’ he said. ‘You’re tired. You can come visit
me any Sunday you like.’
   ‘Are you always at home?’
   ‘Yes, I’m too old now to travel the world, my friend. And so now I
wander about here in my rooms, exploring the things on my tables and
walls.’ He waved a hand at the bookshelves and the dead hummingbirds.
   ‘Did you do a lot of travelling?’ I asked timidly.
   ‘No less than Miklukho-Maklai.’
   The young woman came in as I was hurriedly trying to put on my coat
and having trouble finding my sleeve. She was in a short, close-fitting
jacket, hat and gloves. A small dark veil covered her eyes, making them
appear dark blue. ‘Where do you live?’ she asked.
   I told her.
   ‘So, we are going the same direction as far as Kreshchatik. Shall we?’
   We left. Cherpunov stood in the doorway and watched us go. Then he
said in a loud voice: ‘Masha, please do be careful. And hurry back.’
   ‘All right,’ the woman replied, without bothering to turn round.
   We passed the Nikolsky Fort with its bronze lion heads on its gates,
walked through Mariinsky Park, where I had earlier met the midshipman,
and turned onto Institutskaya Street. The woman was silent. So was I. I was
afraid she would ask me something and I would have to answer. On
Institutskaya Street, she finally did ask me something: ‘What did you like
the most at our museum?’
   ‘The butterfly,’ I said, before pausing and adding: ‘Although I feel bad
for it.’
   ‘Really?’ she said, surprised. ‘Why do you feel bad?’ She addressed me
with ‘vy’, the formal ‘you’, which no one had ever done before. This made
me all the more nervous.
   ‘It’s so beautiful, but almost no one gets to see it,’ I answered.
   ‘What else did you like?’
   On Kreshchatik we stopped in front of Kirchheim’s. The woman asked:
‘Are you allowed to visit pastry shops for cocoa and sweets?’
   I didn’t even know whether or not I was allowed, but I did recall that
once Galya and I had been with Mama to Kirchheim’s, and we had indeed
drunk cocoa on that occasion. So, I said that yes, of course, I was allowed to
treat myself at Kirchheim’s.
   ‘Wonderful! Let’s go.’
   We took a seat in the back. The woman moved a vase of hydrangeas off
to the side of the table and ordered two cups of cocoa and a small cake.
   ‘What form are you in at school?’
   ‘The second.’
   ‘And how old are you?’
   ‘Twelve.’
   ‘I’m twenty-eight. At twelve you can believe anything.’
   ‘What?’ I interrupted.
   ‘Do you enjoy playing games and making things up?’
   ‘Yes.’
   ‘So does Pëtr Petrovich. But I don’t, unfortunately. Maybe you could
include me in some of your games. We could have fun together.’
   ‘What sort of games?’ I asked, curious. The conversation was getting
interesting.
   ‘What sort? Let’s see. Perhaps Cinderella or trying to escape from an evil
king. We could even think up a new game. We could call it “The Butterfly
from the Island of Borneo”.’
   ‘Yes!’ I said, flushed with excitement. ‘We could go to an enchanted
forest in search of living water.’
   ‘At great risk to our lives, of course?’
   ‘Yes, of course, at great risk.’
   ‘We would carry this water cupped in our hands,’ she said and lifted her
veil. ‘When one of us became tired, the other would carry it. We’d have to
pour it back and forth very carefully to make certain we didn’t spill a drop.’
   ‘But one or two drops would have to spill out and fall to the ground, and
there . . .’
   ‘And there,’ she interrupted, ‘in those spots, large bushes with white
flowers will sprout. And then what, what will happen next, do you think?’
   ‘We shall sprinkle this water on the butterfly, and it will come back to
life.’
   ‘And it will turn into a lovely maiden?’ the woman asked and laughed.
‘Well, it’s time to go. They’re probably waiting for you at home.’
   We left. She accompanied me as far as Fundukleevskaya Street. I turned
and watched her go. She was crossing Kreshchatik and had turned to look at
me too. She smiled and waved. Her hand was small, and she wore a black
glove. At home, I didn’t tell a soul, not even Mama, that I had been at
Kirchheim’s. Mama couldn’t understand why I had no appetite for dinner. I
just sat there, obstinately silent. I kept thinking about that woman, but
nothing made any sense. The next day I asked one of the older boys at
school who the woman was.
   ‘You mean you’ve really been to Cherpunov’s?’
   ‘Yes.’
   ‘And you saw his museum?’
   ‘Yes.’
   ‘Lucky you,’ the boy said. ‘That’s his wife. He’s thirty-five years older
than her.’
   I didn’t visit Cherpunov the following Sunday since he had been ill and
didn’t come to school much of the week. A few days later Mama suddenly
asked me over evening tea whether I had seen a young woman during my
visit to Cherpunov’s.
   ‘Yes, I did,’ I said. Then I blushed.
   ‘Well, so it’s true,’ Mama said turning to my father. ‘They say he was so
good to her! She lived like a princess in a golden cage.’
   My father said nothing.
   ‘Kostik,’ Mama said, ‘you’ve had your tea. Go to your room. It’s nearly
your bedtime.’
   She had sent me off so she could talk to Father about Cherpunov. I didn’t
eavesdrop, even though I really wanted to know what had happened. Soon
enough I heard all about it at school. His wife had left him and gone off to
St Petersburg. The old man was sick with grief and wouldn’t see anyone.
   ‘Serves Chernomor right,’ said my classmate Littauer. ‘He shouldn’t
have taken a young wife!’
   His words made us angry. We were all fond of dear old Cherpunov. So
we got even at the start of the next lesson. When our French teacher,
Sermout, came flying into the classroom, the whole class screamed in one
voice: ‘Littauer! Ittauer! Tauer! Auer! Er!’
   Then the room fell silent.
   Sermout flew into a rage and, failing to understand just what had taken
place, as always, yelled: ‘Littauer, get out!’ He then gave Littauer a poor
conduct mark.
   We never saw Cherpunov again. He didn’t come back to school. A year
later I met him on the street. His face was yellow and puffy, and he was
dragging himself along with the aid of a heavy cane. He stopped me, asked
how I was doing at school, and said: ‘Do you remember the butterfly? The
one from the island of Borneo? Well, I don’t have it anymore.’
   I was silent. Cherpunov watched me closely.
   ‘I gave it to the university. Not only that one, but my entire collection of
butterflies. Well, all the best. I’m glad we met.’
   Cherpunov died not long afterwards. I thought about him and the young
woman for a long time. A strange feeling of sadness overcame me when I
recalled her veil and how she smiled and waved as she crossed Kreshchatik.
Years later when I was in the last form at school, our psychology teacher,
while discussing the creative power of the imagination, suddenly asked:
‘Do you remember Cherpunov and his water from various rivers and seas?’
  ‘Yes, of course, we remember,’ the whole class replied.
  ‘Well, I can inform you that those bottles were filled with nothing but
ordinary city tap water. You may ask why Cherpunov deceived you. He
quite rightly believed that this was a way of stimulating your powers of
imagination. Cherpunov placed great value in this. More than once he
commented to me that what separates man from beast is the ability to
imagine. Imagination created art. It expanded the boundaries of the world
and the capacities of our mind and it gave to our lives that special quality
we call poetry.’


1Nikolai Miklukho-Maklai (1844–88), anthropologist and explorer, lived
among and wrote about the people of New Guinea.

                             OceanofPDF.com
15
The First Commandment



Our    divinity teacher, Archpriest Tregubov, had a different-coloured
cassock for every day of the week. Grey, blue, purple, black, brown, green
and, finally, off-white. You could tell what day of the week it was by the
colour of his cassock, be it a Tuesday or a Saturday.
   The moment he appeared in our third form, Tregubov immediately
destroyed our school’s age-old traditions in the teaching of divinity. It was
customary that pupils in all schools received the highest mark in this
subject. This was apparently because divinity teachers were obliged to
exhibit love for their fellow man and so tried not to inflict suffering on us
schoolchildren. Or perhaps it was because neither the divinity teachers nor
the schoolchildren took the subject seriously.
   With one fell swoop Tregubov destroyed our contempt for divinity.
‘Altukhov,’ he said, ‘recite the First Commandment.’
   ‘I am the Lord thy God thou shalt have no other gods before Me!’
Altukhov rattled off and grinned. There was no way one could find fault
with this answer.
   ‘Sit down!’ said Tregubov and then gave Altukhov a zero. ‘Borimovich,
it’s your turn to recite the First Commandment.’
   The colour draining from his face, Borimovich recited the First
Commandment just as correctly as Altukhov and also got a zero.
   Tregubov called on all of us in alphabetical order. All of us recited it
correctly, and Tregubov, smiling with malicious delight, gave every last one
of us a zero. None of us understood what was happening. It foretold great
troubles.
   Having completed recording our marks in his grade book – every single
surname, starting with ‘A’ and ending with ‘Z’ – Tregubov stroked his
beard with his perfumed hands and pronounced: ‘All of you show a
complete lack of respect for punctuation. Thus, you have been fittingly
penalised. Your attitude to Holy Scripture is both slipshod and thoughtless,
as if you were nothing but a lot of little kittens. After the words “I am the
Lord thy God”, there is a comma. And why? Because you must make a
slight pause here in order to highlight the importance of the following
affirmation. And yet all of you race through these holy words as if you were
shelling peas. You should be ashamed of yourselves!’
   He spoke softly, his narrow eyes full of disdain for us. A gold
academician’s badge glistened on his silk cassock.
   Before Tregubov our divinity master had been Archpriest
Zlatoverkhovnikov, a feeble and deaf old man who spoke with a lisp.
Things had been easier with him. You could spout any old nonsense as long
as you spoke quickly and in a monotone voice. Within a minute or two
Zlatoverkhovnikov’s eyelids would begin to droop and soon after he’d be
fast asleep. Then we were free to do whatever we wanted, just as long as we
didn’t wake the old priest. The boys at the back played chemin-de-fer and
fried small fish on matchsticks. Those up front read The Adventures of the
Famous American Detective Nick Carter. Zlatoverkhovnikov snored softly,
and we boys had our fun until a few minutes before the bell rang and it was
time for us to wake him up by dropping all our books on the floor or
sneezing in unison on the count of three.
   After the old priest, Tregubov appeared before us like an avenging Lord
of Hosts. He even looked something like the Lord of Hosts peering down
from the church dome – enormous, with a bushy beard and wrathful
eyebrows. Not only were we pupils afraid of Tregubov, so, too, were the
teachers. He was a monarchist, a member of the State Council, and the
enemy of free thought. Equal in rank to the Metropolitan of Kiev, he
induced fits of silent terror in the country priests forced to come before him
for a dressing down over their various infractions. Tregubov loved to speak
at the public discussions about philosophical and religious matters that were
then all the rage. He spoke with smooth, sugary eloquence and gave off the
smell of eau-de-Cologne.
   Our hatred of him was as cold as his for us. But to this very day we still
remember the holy scripture he taught us. We used any pretext to miss his
lessons. A reliable refuge on such occasions could be found by attending
the lessons in Roman Catholic theology. These were taught at the same
time, but in a different classroom. It was only there that we felt safe. This
territory belonged, in a sense, to the Roman Catholic Church and Pope Leo
XIII. Tregubov’s authority went no further than the threshold of his dusty,
unexceptional classroom, while in here, Father Olendsky was in charge.
Tall, stout, with white hair and a black rosary on his wrist, he was never in
the least surprised by the appearance at his classroom door of some
embarrassed Russian Orthodox pupil.
   ‘Run away, have you?’ he would ask in a stern voice.
   ‘No, Father, it’s just that I wanted to sit in your room for a while.’
   ‘Sit for a while, eh? Well, you naughty little boy,’ Olendsky shook with
laughter. ‘Come here.’
   The boy approached Olendsky. The priest gave him a loud whack on the
head with his snuff box. This gesture signalled the absolution of all sins.
   ‘Sit down,’ Olendsky told the boy, ‘over there in the corner, behind
Khorzhevsky,’ (Khorzhevsky was an extremely tall Pole) ‘so no one can see
you from the corridor and drag you off into the fires of Gehenna. Here, sit
and read this newspaper!’ Olendsky pulled from the pocket of his soutane a
copy of Kievan Thought folded in four and handed it to the fugitive.
   ‘Thank you, Father,’ the fugitive said.
   ‘Don’t thank me, thank God,’ replied Olendsky. ‘I am nothing more than
a pitiful tool in His hands. He has delivered you from the House of Bondage
like the Jews from the land of Egypt.’
   Of course, Tregubov knew that Olendsky was hiding us in his classroom.
But even Tregubov was defenceless before Olendsky. Whenever they met,
the good-natured priest became exquisitely polite and venomous. The
dignity attached to the position of arch-priest of the Orthodox Church
prevented Tregubov from arguing with Olendsky. We made as much use of
this fact as possible. In the end, we knew the Catholic liturgy better than
many of the Poles.
   ‘Staniszewski, Tadeusz,’ said the priest, ‘recite the Magnificat.’
   Tadeusz Staniszewski stood up, straightened his belt, coughed,
swallowed hard, looked out of the window, then at the ceiling, and, finally,
confessed: ‘I’ve forgotten it, Father.’
   ‘Forgotten? But you never forget to come to church when Panna
Gzhibovskaya is there, do you? Sit down! Who knows the Magnificat?
Well? Anyone? Oh, Blessed Virgin of the Virgins, Queen of the Apostles!
How is this possible? You’re all silent! Everyone who knows the Magnificat
raise your hand.’
    The Poles never raised their hands. But once in a while one of the
Orthodox boys did, one of those miserable fugitives from Tregubov.
    ‘All right, then,’ said an exasperated Olendsky, ‘you recite the
Magnificat! And should God not punish all of you,’ and here Olendsky
pointed at the Poles, ‘then it will be due only to His great mercy.’
    Then the fugitive stood up and recited the Magnificat without a single
mistake.
    ‘Come here!’ said Olendsky.
    The fugitive approached. Olendsky removed from the pocket of his
soutane a large handful of sweets that looked like coffee beans and gave
them to the boy. Next, Olendsky snorted a pinch of snuff, quickly recovered
himself, and began to tell us his favourite story about how he had held a
requiem Mass for Chopin’s heart after it had been returned to Warsaw
soldered in a silver urn. After school, Olendsky walked back to his rectory.
Along the way he always stopped children on the street and ruffled their
hair as they passed by. Everyone in Kiev knew him – the tall priest with the
smiling eyes.
    For us children, divinity lessons and church matters in general were a
constant source of torment. The only thing we enjoyed was Lent. We had a
whole week off to fast and attend services before confessing our sins and
receiving the Eucharist. We always chose one of the suburban churches.
The priests there didn’t pay close attention to whether the schoolboys
bothered to attend all the necessary Lenten services.
    Lent almost always included the grey and misty month of March. The
snow had already begun to turn dark and dirty. And with each passing day,
more and more patches of blue sky signalling the arrival of spring could be
seen in the gaps between the clouds. Jackdaws cawed in the naked poplars.
Greyish pools of cold water formed on the melting ice of the Dnieper, and
in the markets they were already selling pussy willows covered with furry
little catkins.

                                     •

We dreamed of finding some way of getting under Tregubov’s skin, but he
was invulnerable. Only once were we able to avenge ourselves for all the
torments and fears he had inflicted on us. And our revenge was merciless.
   When we were in the fourth form, we heard from some of the older boys
that Tregubov was afraid of rats. We smuggled in a small grey rat and
released it beneath our desks while Tregubov was telling us some story
from the New Testament. Zhdanovich squealed and jumped up onto his
desk.
   ‘What’s going on?’ Tregubov asked in a threatening voice.
   ‘A rat, Father!’ said Zhdanovich, trembling.
   We all jumped up. The terrified rat was running around Tregubov’s feet.
With remarkable grace, Tregubov hopped onto his chair and lifted his
cassock up to his knees. We saw that he was wearing striped trousers and
slippers with delicate trim on them. We started throwing our textbooks at
the rat. It squeaked and darted off in the direction of the blackboard. Father
Tregubov quickly moved from his chair to his desk.
   ‘Open the doors!’ he roared in his canonical bass voice. ‘The doors! Let
it out into the corridor!’
   We pretended that we were too frightened to go and open the doors. Then
Father Tregubov screamed so loud that the glass shook in its frame: ‘Platon
Fëdorovich! Over here!’ And then he flung his mark book at the rat.
   The door flew open and there stood the alarmed Supervisor Platon
Fëdorovich. Proctor Kazimir was there as well, looking over Platon’s
shoulder. Finally, Inspector Bodyansky showed up. Frowning so as not to
laugh, he took command and began organising the expulsion of the rat.
Tregubov refused to climb down from his desk. He merely lowered his
cassock, standing there before us like a monument to himself, twice life-
size. Once the rat had been expelled, Tregubov, aided by Bodyansky,
climbed down from the desk. One of the boys obligingly handed him his
mark book, and Father Tregubov, having by now regained his usual sublime
appearance, removed himself from the classroom. Only some time later did
Tregubov realise that the rat could not have ended up in the classroom by
pure chance. He demanded an investigation into the matter, but it led
nowhere. The entire school rejoiced, but Inspector Bodyansky said: ‘Don’t
gloat over human weakness! Better you take a close look at yourselves, for
I have recently begun to notice once again that some of you, gentlemen,
have been going about with broken insignia in your caps. And for this I’m
prepared to deprive any boy of his dinner.’
   I am forced to jump ahead in my story in order to describe how we got
rid of Tregubov. It was in the eighth form and I was then living alone,
without any family, in a room on Diky Lane that I rented from an infantry
lieutenant by the name of Romuald Kozlovsky. He lived with his mother,
Pani Kozlovskaya, a quiet and kind old woman. It was the autumn of 1910
– dank and dreary, pewter skies, and tree branches sheathed in ice. Long-
dead leaves that refused to fall rattled in the cold wind. On days like this I
often had headaches. I didn’t go to school but stayed in my little room on
Diky Lane, lying in bed with my head wrapped, and trying not to groan for
fear of disturbing Pani Kozlovskaya.
   Gradually I warmed up, and the pain subsided. Remaining in bed, I
would read one of the yellow paperbacks from the Universal Library. The
fire crackled in the stove. All was quiet in the small flat. Now and then a bit
of snow blew past the window. The pain now gone, my head felt especially
clear and I was surrounded by beauty – the colour of the blue-grey sky, the
faint smell of burning wood, and the snow on the windowpane. It was on
such a day that Pani Kozlovskaya opened the door to the ring of the
postman, took the newspaper, gasped and hurried into my room.
   ‘Kostik,’ she said, ‘something terrible’s happened to Count Tolstoy!’
   I jumped out of bed, grabbed the newspaper, which smelled of paraffin,
and began to read the first telegrams about Tolstoy’s flight. A terrified Pani
Kozlovskaya stared at me and kept repeating: ‘Dear Lord, save him! Save
him, dear Lord!’
   I got dressed in a hurry, pulled on my coat and went out. I thought that
everything in the city must have changed in an instant with the arrival of
this staggering news, but everything appeared to be normal. Trucks carried
firewood through the streets, an old Kiev tram clattered by, children were
out walking with their governesses. Unable to stay away, I headed off to
school.
   Newspapers littered the desks. Our form master – the Latin teacher
Suboch – was late to class. He was never late to class. He came in,
collapsed in his chair, removed his pince-nez, and sat hunched for a long
time staring out of the window with his bulging, short-sighted eyes. It was
as if he was waiting for something. Finally, he said to me: ‘Dear boy, go to
the offices of Kievan Thought. They’re posting the latest telegrams there.
Find out what’s happening. We’ll wait for you.’
   Nothing of the sort had ever happened in our class before, but now
everyone looked upon it as something quite normal. I got up and left. Platon
Fëdorovich intercepted me in the corridor. ‘Where are you going?’ he
threatened and blocked my path.
   I told him. Platon Fëdorovich bowed his head and promptly stepped aside
to allow me to pass. Upon returning I paused to look into the classroom
through the door’s upper pane before going in. Suboch was reading aloud.
No one was moving, as if they were frozen in place. I quietly opened the
door and heard a familiar passage from Tolstoy’s Anna Karenina.
   Somehow, we managed to muddle through our lessons for the next two or
three days. Then, on another dank morning, I left my room to find special
editions of the newspapers with black borders on the front page, bewildered
people on the streets, and crowds of students near the university. They were
just standing there, not saying a word. Everyone had a black crêpe armband
on their coat sleeve. Some student I didn’t know came up to me and fixed
an armband to my coat.
   I made my way to school. Mounted Cossack patrols rode up and down
the streets. Large groups of policemen had gathered in the courtyards.
Along the way I met up with some of my classmates – all of them were
wearing black armbands like mine. We took them off in the cloakroom and
put them on our jackets. The school was unusually quiet. Even the first-year
boys kept the noise down. That day our first lesson was divinity. Tregubov
entered quickly, much quicker than normal, crossed himself before the icon,
and sat down at his desk. Matusevich, the pupil on duty for the day, got up
and went over to him. Tregubov gave him a weary look but said nothing.
   ‘Yesterday, at six o’clock in the morning, at Astapovo railway station,’
said Matusevich, trying to remain calm and speak loudly, ‘the greatest
writer of our country, and perhaps of the entire world, Leo Nikolaevich
Tolstoy, died.’
   The desk lids slammed. The whole class stood up. In the profound
silence could be heard the clatter of horses’ hooves as a patrol rode past.
Tregubov leaned forward over his desk, squeezed its edges tightly with his
fat fingers, and sat motionless.
   ‘Stand up, Father!’ Matusevich said in a soft voice.
   Tregubov slowly and heavily rose to his feet. His neck was crimson. He
stood there with his eyes lowered. A few minutes passed. To us it seemed
like hours. Then we all slowly and quietly took our seats. Tregubov picked
up his mark book and walked out of the classroom. He stopped at the doors,
turned, and said: ‘You have forced me to honour the memory of an apostate
who was excommunicated by the church. We won’t discuss whether or not
he was a great writer. I have committed a crime against my office and will
have to answer for it before God and my superiors. Nevertheless, from this
day forward I am no longer your teacher. Farewell. And may God grant you
wisdom.’
   We were silent. Tregubov walked out. The next day a new divinity
teacher arrived. Tregubov’s replacement was a young priest, a lover of
philosophy and literature with a face like the poet Nadson. We fell in love
with him immediately for his discretion, charm and youth, and our warm
feelings for him remained until it was time for us to leave school.

                            OceanofPDF.com
16
Lime Blossoms



I had never seen such ancient lime trees. At night their crowns were lost in
the stars. When the wind blew, the stars seemed to dart here and there
among the branches, like fireflies. In the daytime it was dark under the
limes, while overhead, in the fresh green leaves, a world of birds of each
and every sort squawked, fought, whistled and fluttered from branch to
branch.
   ‘Just wait,’ Uncle Kolya liked to say. ‘Soon the lime trees will blossom,
and then . . .’
   He never did say what would happen when the lime trees blossomed, but
we already knew ourselves that then the old park at Rëvny would be
transformed into a place of wonders, of the kind which only occur in
fairytales. After school had broken up for the summer, the whole family
returned to Rëvny for the second time. Even my father had come along
during his holiday. The impoverished owner of the estate rented out two or
three wooden dachas in the park for the summer. The estate was far from
any towns and the railway. Almost no one came during the summer, except
for Uncle Kolya and us. In order to picture the beauty of the place, one must
describe it in topographical precision.
   A forgotten park of lime trees, wild with hazel and buckthorn. Mossy
benches lost amid lilac bushes. Overgrown allées with names like the
Temple of Diana, the Path of Sighs and the Nightingale Ravine. Sunny
glades with solitary pines and wild flowers, and then another canopy of
mighty and, so it seemed, thousand-year-old lime trees. The park sloped
down to the river Rëvna. On the other side rose a small hill covered with a
dense wood. A single sandy path led down to the river. You could follow it
to a crumbling old chapel, which contained an icon of Tikhon Zadonsky. A
bit farther on the path petered out in some dry grass.
   No one dared to venture farther than the chapel by themselves – not even
the bravest of the summer residents, Volodya Rumyantsev, a student of the
Petersburg Institute of Forestry. A woody thicket surrounded the timbered
chapel; it smelled of mould and ferns. At dusk, owls flew out from its
depths. Once at night we heard a distant cry coming from the forest – it was
a wandering pedlar who had got lost on his way from the Svensky
Monastery to the fair at Trubchevsk. The forest warden found him and
brought him to Rëvny. The pedlar, a lean little man with blue eyes, couldn’t
stop weeping and crossing himself.
   One day, we boys, together with Volodya Rumyantsev, took a compass
and set off for the woods. We saw bottomless ravines, filled to the brim
with brambles and wild hops. Water gurgled far down below, but it was
impossible to descend. We discovered in the woods a small stream whose
water was so clear it could have been glass. From the steep bank we could
see clouds of minnows darting about along the bottom. Eventually we came
upon a rotting cross by the stream’s source. A tin cup hung from the
crosspiece, and a flowering bindweed had grown up and around the cup,
holding it in place. We tore away the weed and scooped a cupful of water
from the spring. It tasted of rust. Above us cranes rattled, orioles whistled,
hawks soared. Clouds with dark blue bottoms floated by over our heads. We
gazed at them and thought how well they must be able to take in this land of
mysterious forests from up on high. Woodpeckers tapped diligently at dry
trunks, and here and there pinecones fell upon our heads.
   Volodya Rumyantsev kept insisting that there was an abandoned Old
Believers’ monastery in the woods. The monastery was now home to
nothing but bees, and if you found it, you could take all the honey you ever
wanted. We never did find that monastery. We climbed up pine trees to
search for the timbered roof with its crooked eight-pointed cross amid the
sea of greenery. A cool breeze blew up in the treetops, and our hands stuck
to the sappy branches. Black-eyed squirrels jumped about us. The young
green pinecones smelled of turpentine. But no matter how much we
searched from the tops of the pines, as if from a lighthouse, shading our
eyes from the sun with one hand, we never saw a thing other than forest and
drifting clouds, which made us dizzy as they floated by.
   From the tops of the tall pines the clouds appeared much closer than from
the ground. You wanted to reach out and touch these massive, snow-white
puffs. High above the clouds, a bright ripple pierced the sky and poured
forth rows of transparent plumes. Volodya Rumyantsev said that these were
also clouds, but they were so high up they consisted not of water vapour,
but ice crystals. The plumes hung motionless in the cold, unattainable
height.
   Along with the forest, another place of mystery was the river. It twisted
beneath overhanging willows, divided into two branches, washed the sides
of an island, and in many places was covered by water lilies and flowering
rushes that stretched from bank to bank. Wooden dams had been built along
the river by the island, where a rundown sawmill stood. Mountains of
sawdust had piled up in front of some empty sheds. On hot days the smell
of the mill’s wood shavings was overpowering. At one time the mill had
been powered by a water wheel, but it had long since collapsed and now the
wheel and the wooden teeth of its gears were covered in furry cobwebs and
yellow mushrooms the colour of sulphur.
   Beyond the dams there were deep pools – home to enormous pike –
which we called ‘the drop-off’. The water here was black and whirled about
slowly. My Uncle Kolya and I dropped dozens of hooks and spoon lures
into these pools. Along with pike, the waters were home to large, almost
dark blue perch. We fished for them from the wet logs of the dam. There
were times when the perch tore the rods from our hands and swam off. Our
bamboo poles slipped quickly into the depths like golden arrows. They
usually resurfaced below the drop-off, and we would retrieve them, together
with two perch, from a boat.
   There was also an old house with columns at Rëvny, built, so it was said,
by Rastrelli.1 Swallows nested on the pediment. Radiant light flowed
through wavy glass into the empty halls, stairways and corridors. Whenever
anyone walked along the enfilade, the furniture creaked and the chandeliers
tinkled softly. No one lived in the house. Only on certain family
celebrations, such as the name day of Maria (there were two Marias in the
family – my mother and Aunt Marusya, Uncle Kolya’s wife), was the hall
with the musicians’ gallery opened up and aired in preparation for a ball.
   We hung round lanterns from the balcony and set off fireworks in the
park late in the evening. The rockets shot up through the dense foliage and
released their coloured balls of fire, illuminating the old house in flickering
reddish flames as they slowly began to fall. Once the balls went out, the
summer night returned to the park, with its distant croaking of frogs,
glittering stars and smell of blossoming lime trees. Comrades of my uncle –
fellow artillery officers – came to the name day celebrations from Bryansk.
Once even the Moscow tenor Askochensky came and gave a concert in the
old ballroom.
   ‘Oh, if only you’d return to me once more,’ sang Askochensky, ‘to where
we were so happy! You’d hear a whisper in the trees and would know ’tis
the moaning of my aching heart.’
   It seemed to me that this romance had been written about our park. It had
heard many declarations of longing and witnessed the pale faces of lovers,
along with their tears upon parting. ‘When melancholy tones disturb your
sleep,’ Askochensky sang, leaning against the piano, while Aunt Marusya,
quickly brushing back a strand of hair, accompanied him, ‘or when the wind
moans on a stormy night, know ’tis the sound of my inconsolable weeping.’
   Supper at Uncle Kolya’s dacha followed the ball. The candles in their
round shades crackled with the sound of burning moths. We schoolboys
were served wine, just like the grown-ups. We began to feel a bit of Dutch
courage. Once, after some wine, we decided that each of us would run right
round the park by himself in the dark of the night. To be certain no one
cheated, each of us had to leave something on the bench in the Nightingale
Ravine. Uncle Kolya promised to check in the morning that everyone had
kept his word. The first to go was Aunt Marusya’s brother, Pavel Tennov, a
student at the Academy of Medicine and Surgery. Lanky, with a snub nose
and curly beard, he resembled Chekhov and was known as exceedingly
trusting and good. For this reason, everyone played tricks on him.
   Pavel was supposed to leave an empty wine bottle on the bench in the
Nightingale Ravine. It was my turn next. I dashed off into the tree-lined
allée. Dew-covered branches lashed my face. I had the feeling that someone
was bounding after me in pursuit. I stopped and listened. Someone was
creeping about in the undergrowth. I raced on farther and farther until I
came out into a clearing. The moon was coming up. Ahead, covered in
impenetrable darkness, lay the Nightingale Ravine, and I threw myself into
it as if it were dark water. The river glittered, and from the other side came
the doleful cry of a bittern.
   I stopped by the bench and could smell the lime tree blossoms. Their
scent filled the night air. It was quiet, and I couldn’t believe that not far
from here, on the brightly lit verandah, happy guests were chatting and
laughing. We had agreed in advance to play a trick on Pavel. I grabbed the
bottle he had left on the bench and threw it into the river. The bottle twisted
as it flew, flashing under the moon. Circular, moonlit ripples widened
outward towards the banks. I ran farther along the edge of the ravine. I
could smell the damp earth and angelica. Panting, I eventually reached the
long lime-tree allée. Ahead, the lights burned brightly.
   ‘Kostik!’ I heard Aunt Marusya call nervously. ‘Is that you?’
   ‘Yes!’ I replied, running up to her.
   ‘What nonsense you all are forever coming up with!’ said Aunt Marusya.
She was standing in the allée, a light woollen shawl around her shoulders.
‘Your mother’s very worried. Whose idea was this? Gleb’s, I suppose.’
   ‘No, it wasn’t Gleb’s idea,’ I lied. ‘We came up with it together.’
   Aunt Marusya had guessed correctly. Uncle Kolya’s ward, Gleb
Afanasiev, a shaggy-haired schoolboy from Bryansk whose inventiveness
was inexhaustible, had proposed the idea of this nighttime run through the
park. He always had a sly twinkle in his grey eyes. A day did not pass
without Gleb coming up with some new idea. And so, no matter what,
everyone always blamed Gleb for everything. In the morning Uncle Kolya
went to check the items on the bench. The bottle Pavel had left was not
there. Everyone started to tease him, saying that he’d got scared and never
made it to the ravine, but just threw the bottle down somewhere along the
way. But Pavel quickly guessed what was going on and threatened Gleb:
‘Just you wait, you’ll pay for this!’
   Gleb was silent and didn’t give me away. That same day Pavel dunked
Gleb several times while they were out swimming and then tied Gleb’s
trousers into a tight knot and tossed them into the water. Gleb spent a long
time undoing the knot with his teeth. He looked ridiculous in his wrinkled,
heavily chewed trousers, which was particularly unfortunate given that in
one of the dachas at Rëvny lived the Karelins, a mother and her two school-
age daughters, from Orël. Lyuba, the elder of the two, spent all her time
reading in some hidden corner of the park. Her cheeks were fiery red, and
her fair hair was always ruffled. We were constantly finding black ribbons
that had fallen from Lyuba’s plaits near the benches where she had been
sitting. The younger sister, Sasha, was capricious and sarcastic; Gleb had
fallen for her. He could not imagine letting her see him in his rumpled
trousers. I felt guilty and asked Mama to iron them. In his newly pressed
trousers, Gleb was at once restored to his former casual, confident
appearance.
   There had been nothing special about our run through the park that night,
but I could not forget it for a long time. I recalled the waves of lime tree
blossoms brushing my face, the cry of the bittern, and a night seemingly
without end, brought to life by the light of the stars and filled with the
echoes of happiness. At times that summer I felt that there must be
practically no place left on earth for human grief. But soon after the name
day celebration I began to have my doubts. I saw a barefoot boy in a ragged
peasant’s coat near our dacha. He had come to sell strawberries. He smelled
of berries and smoke. He wanted ten kopecks for a jugful of strawberries,
but Mama gave him twenty and a piece of pie. The boy stood there staring
at the ground and rubbing one bare foot against the other. He tucked the pie
inside his shirt and was silent.
   ‘Whose boy are you?’ Mama asked him
   ‘Aniska’s,’ he answered shyly.
   ‘Why aren’t you eating your pie?’
   ‘It’s for my mum,’ he said, in a hoarse voice, not raising his eyes. ‘She’s
not well. She was hauling wood, hurt her belly.’
   ‘And where’s your father?’
   ‘He’s dead.’
   The boy sniffled, stepped back and took off running. Frightened, he
looked back over his shoulder as he ran, clutching his chest to keep from
losing his pie. For a long time, I could not forget that tow-headed boy and
secretly judged Mama. She had eased her guilty conscience with a piece of
pie and twenty kopecks. I understood that very well. I understood that such
bitter injustice demands something more than pitiful crumbs. But how to
end such injustice, which I encountered ever more frequently in my life, I
still did not know.
   We often heard my father and Uncle Kolya arguing at teatime. They
argued about the future of Russia. Uncle Kolya tried to prove that education
was the key to the happiness of the Russian people. My father believed that
revolution would bring happiness. Pavel, who called himself a populist,
joined in the arguments. Once he was nearly expelled from school for a
speech he gave at a students’ meeting. Volodya Rumyantsev kept quiet, but
he would tell us boys that neither my father nor Uncle Kolya nor Pavel
understood the slightest thing.
   ‘And do you?’ we asked him.
   ‘Not in the least!’ a satisfied Volodya answered. ‘And I don’t want to
understand. I love Russia – that’s all there is to it!’
   Volodya was the brother of my Uncle Kolya’s dearest comrade at the
Arsenal in Bryansk, Captain Rumyantsev. Volodya was a bit deaf. He slept
in the hayloft and always had pieces of straw stuck to his reddish beard. He
disdained all human comforts. Instead of a pillow he slept with his rolled-up
student’s jacket under his head. He shuffled when he walked and spoke in a
mumble. Under his jacket he wore a faded blue traditional Russian shirt tied
with a black silk tasselled cord.
   Volodya’s hands were always covered in burns from developing fluids
and fixatives – he was passionate about photography. He was an
enterprising young man. He signed on with a Moscow lithography firm,
Scherer and Nobholz, and travelled in the summer to remote towns to
photograph the local sights, which the lithographers printed as picture
postcards and sold on bookstalls at railway stations. We liked Volodya’s
hobby. He often disappeared from Rëvny for several days, and then
returned to say he’d been to Yefremovo, to Yelets, to Lipetsk.
   ‘Now, that’s the life, my young fellows!’ he’d say, sitting in the banya,
lathering his head. ‘The day before yesterday, I swam across the Oka,
yesterday, the Moksha, and today, the Rëvna.’
   He infected us with his love for provincial Russia. He knew it inside out
– its fairs, monasteries, country estates, customs and traditions. He had
visited Lermontov’s birthplace in Tarkhany, Fet’s country house near
Kursk,2 the horse fair at Lebedyan, the island of Valaam and the battlefield
at Kulikovo. Everywhere he went he had elderly female acquaintances –
former schoolteachers or minor local officials – who would put him up for
the night. They fed him fish pie and cabbage soup, and in return for their
hospitality he taught the old ladies’ canaries how to whistle a polka or gave
them presents of superphosphate – adding it to their geraniums would
produce huge scarlet blossoms guaranteed to amaze their neighbours.
   He never took part in arguments about the fate of Russia, but always had
something to say when the conversation turned towards the subject of
Tambov ham, frozen apples from Ryazan or sturgeon from the Volga. On
such subjects no one was his equal. Uncle Kolya liked to joke that only
Volodya Rumyantsev knew the price of bast shoes in Kineshma and how
much a pound of goose down was going for in Kalyazin.
   Once Volodya Rumyantsev travelled to Orël and returned with awful
news. We were playing croquet by the dacha. We all loved to play. Our
games often dragged on after dark when we’d have to bring lamps out onto
the lawn. We did not fight over anything as fiercely as over croquet,
especially with my brother Borya. He played well and always became the
‘rover’ very quickly. He’d then start whacking our balls and sent them so
far that sometimes we couldn’t find them. We were so angry, and when
Borya took aim we muttered: ‘The Devil in your hand, a toad in your
mouth!’ There were times this spell worked, and Borya would miss. We
also fought with Gleb. When he played against Sasha, he would always
muff his shot and lose intentionally in order to make the girl happy. But
when he played with Sasha against us, he showed off his miraculous skill
and always won. Usually, all the summer residents gathered to play croquet.
Even Uncle Kolya’s dogs, Mordan and Chetvertak, came running to watch,
although they always were careful to lie down behind the pine trees to stay
out of the way of the balls.
   That morning the croquet lawn was very noisy, as always. Then we heard
the sound of rolling wheels. A tarantass drove up to Uncle Kolya’s dacha.
Someone shouted: ‘Volodya Rumyantsev has arrived!’ No one paid any
attention: we were all used to his constant comings and goings. A minute
later Volodya appeared. He walked up in a dusty topcoat and boots and his
face was pinched as if he were about to cry. In his hand he held a
newspaper.
   ‘What is it?’ asked a worried Uncle Kolya.
   ‘Chekhov has died.’
   Volodya turned round and returned to the dacha. We ran after him. Uncle
Kolya snatched the newspaper from Volodya, read it, tossed it on the table,
and walked off to his room. Aunt Marusya followed anxiously behind.
Pavel had taken off his pince-nez and rubbed the lenses with his
handkerchief for a long time.
   ‘Kostik,’ Mama said, ‘go down to the river and call Papa. He can stop his
fishing for once.’
   She said this as if Father could have somehow known already about
Chekhov’s death, but wasn’t saddened by it or even cared given his
frivolous nature. I felt bad for my father but went anyway. Gleb Afanasiev
came with me. All of a sudden he became quite serious. ‘Yes, Kostik!’ he
said as we walked, and then sighed deeply. I told my father that Chekhov
had died. All at once he went pale and slumped over.
   ‘How is it possible?’ he said in a confused voice. ‘I never thought I’d
outlive Chekhov . . .’
   We walked back past the croquet lawn. Mallets and balls lay strewn
about. The lime trees were full of noisy birds and the sun shone through the
branches, making green patches on the grass. I had already read some
Chekhov and loved it. I walked and thought that such people as Chekhov
ought never to die.
   Two days later Volodya Rumyantsev left for Chekhov’s funeral in
Moscow. We accompanied him to the station at Sinezërki. Volodya was
carrying a basket of flowers to lay on Chekhov’s grave. They were simple
wild flowers. We had picked them in the fields and woods, and Mama had
packed them between layers of damp moss and made a cover out of a wet
cloth. We tried to pick as many wild flowers as possible because we were
certain Chekhov loved them. We picked many King Solomon’s seals, pinks,
daisies and centauries. Aunt Marusya added some jasmine she had cut in
the park.
   The train left in the evening. We walked all the way back from Sinezërki
and did not arrive at Rëvny until dawn. A waxing crescent moon hung low
over the woods. It had rained earlier, and the moon’s tender light shone in
the puddles. The smell of wet grass hung in the air. A lone cuckoo was still
calling in the park. Once the moon set, out came the stars for a brief
moment before being blotted out by the dawn mist. It rustled for a time,
trickling off the bushes, until a peaceful sun rose and warmed the earth.


1 Francesco Bartolomeo Rastrelli (1700–71), Italian architect chiefly active
in Russia; works include the Winter Palace in St Petersburg.
2   Afanasy Fet (1820–92), influential and beloved lyric poet.

                               OceanofPDF.com
17
Just a Little Boy



Inspector Bodyansky walked briskly into our third-form classroom. He was
wearing his new uniform frock coat. The inspector’s cunning eyes flashed.
We rose to our feet.
   ‘On the occasion of the Imperial Manifesto granting civil liberties to the
nation, the school will be closed for three days,’ Bodyansky said.
‘Congratulations! Now put away your books and go home. And I advise
you to stay out of the grown-ups’ way for the next few days.’
   We raced out of the school. Autumn that year was remarkable. The sun
was still hot in October. The trees in the parks glittered with a powdery
gold, none of which they let fall on the paths, and shone in all their fiery
beauty. We were still going about in our summer coats. Pouring out into the
street, we noticed crowds with red flags near one of the large university
buildings. They were listening to speeches being delivered from the top of
the steps and shouting ‘Hurrah!’ Hats were being tossed in the air.
   We climbed up on the railings of Nikolaevskaya Square and also began to
shout ‘Hurrah!’ and toss our hats in the air. They got stuck in the chestnut
trees as they fell. We shook the trees, and the leaves, along with our hats,
dropped on us like crackling rain. We laughed with delight. We had already
pinned red ribbons to our coats. In the middle of the square stood Nicholas I
in blackened bronze, one foot thrust forward, looking from atop his pedestal
with arrogant disapproval upon this disorder. The crowd fell silent, the red
flags were lowered and we heard solemn voices in song: ‘You fell as
victims in the fateful struggle . . .’
   Everyone began to drop to their knees. We took off our hats as well and
sang along with the funeral march, although we didn’t know all the words.
Then the crowd rose and set off along the railings of the square. I caught
sight of my brother Borya in the crowd with our lodger, a Montenegrin
student named Marković.
   ‘Go home at once!’ my brother said. ‘And don’t you dare go out again by
yourself.’
   ‘Can’t I stay with you?’ I asked timidly.
   ‘You’ll be crushed. Off you go. You can see everything tomorrow.’
   I so wanted to march off together with that joyous and triumphant crowd,
but Borya had already disappeared. Somewhere far ahead a band struck up
‘The Workers’ Marseillaise’, and I recognised its famous, ringing notes:
‘Let us denounce the old world, / Let us shake its dust from our feet!’
   I climbed through the railing and joined the crowd. A girl in an astrakhan
hat, most likely a university student, reached out her hand to me and we
walked on together. I couldn’t see a thing in front of me other than the
backs of other marchers. People were standing on the rooftops and waving
their hats at us. As we were passing the Opera House, I heard the clop of
hooves. I climbed up onto the kerb and saw a line of mounted police. They
were moving back, making way for the crowd to pass. The fat chief of
police made way as well, holding a long salute and smiling
condescendingly. I jumped down from the kerb and once more couldn’t see
a thing. I could tell where we were going only by the shop signs. Now we
were descending Fundukleevskaya Street past the Bergonie Theatre, next
we were turning onto Kreshchatik and walking past the Kirchheim pastry
shop. Then we passed Lyuteranskaya Street and the Idzikovskaya Library.
   ‘Where are we going?’ I asked the girl in the astrakhan hat.
   ‘City Hall. There’s going to be a meeting. We are now free as birds. Do
you understand?’
   ‘Yes, I do,’ I replied.
   ‘Where do you live?’ she asked all of a sudden.
   ‘On Nikolsko-Botanicheskaya Street.’
   ‘Do your parents know you’re here at the demonstration?’
   ‘Everyone’s at the demonstration,’ I replied, trying to avoid the subject of
my parents.
   We passed Balabukha’s dried-fruit shop and Nikolaevskaya Street and
stopped. It was impossible to go any farther. A dense crowd stretched all the
way to the city hall. On its roof sparkled the gilded figure of St Michael –
the symbol of Kiev. I could see the large balcony now filled with bare-
headed people. One of them started to speak, but we couldn’t hear a thing. I
could only see how the wind ruffled his grey hair. Someone grabbed me by
the shoulder. I turned around and saw our Latin teacher, Suboch.
   ‘Konstantin Paustovsky,’ he said sternly, even though his eyes were
laughing. ‘What are you doing here? Go home this instant.’
   ‘Don’t worry, he’s with me,’ said the girl.
   ‘I beg your pardon, Mademoiselle, I didn’t know,’ Suboch politely
replied.
   The crowd moved back and separated us from Suboch. The girl took my
hand and we tried to push our way through to the pavement.
   ‘Calm down, citizens!’ a hoarse voice ordered nearby. The girl and I
reached the pavement, and she pulled me to the wall of a yellow building
with an arched gateway, which I recognised as the post office. I didn’t
understand why she was holding my hand so tightly and pulling me into the
gateway. I couldn’t see a thing other than people’s backs and pigeons flying
over the crowd. They looked like pieces of paper as they caught the light. A
trumpet blared in the distance – Ta-ta-ta-ta! Ta-ta-ta-ta! And then all was
silent again.
   ‘Comrade soldiers!’ shouted the same hoarse voice, and then all of a
sudden there came a terrible cracking sound, almost as if a heavy sheet had
been torn in two. Next, plaster was raining down on us. The pigeons flew
off, leaving the sky empty. There came a second crack, and the crowd raced
for the sides of the buildings. The girl tugged me into the courtyard, and the
last thing I saw on Kreshchatik was the sight of a thin student in an
unbuttoned great-coat leaping onto the window ledge of Balabukha’s shop
and drawing a black Browning.
   ‘What’s happening?’ I asked the girl.
   ‘They’re shooting! The troops are shooting.’
   ‘Why?’
   She didn’t answer. We ran through tangled, narrow courtyards. Behind us
we heard screams, gunshots, the pounding of feet. The day suddenly grew
dark, shrouded in a yellow smoke. It was hard for me to run with my heavy
satchel; the books kept banging against my back. We kept running through
courtyards until we came out onto Proreznaya Street and then headed up
towards the Golden Gate. Two shiny ambulances raced past. A panting,
pale-faced group caught up with us and then kept on running. A Cossack
unit galloped down Proreznaya Street, led by an officer wielding a drawn
sabre. Someone let out a piercing whistle behind them, but they didn’t stop.
   ‘My God, what a foul deed!’ the girl kept repeating. ‘It’s a trap! With one
hand they give us freedom, while with the other they shoot us down!’
   We had run in a large circle and after passing St Vladimir’s Cathedral
returned to Nikolaevskaya Square, the very spot where I’d only just hung
from the railings, cheered ‘Hurrah!’ and waved my cap.
   ‘Thank you,’ I said to the girl. ‘I’m not far from home. I can make it on
my own.’
   She walked off. I leaned against the railing and took off my hat – it hurt
and I had a terrible headache. I was frightened. An old man in a bowler
walked past and asked what was the matter. I couldn’t even answer. The
man shook his head and walked on. I pulled on my hat and headed for
home. It was already getting dark. A crimson sunset was reflected in the
windows. This was the hour when the street lamps were usually being lit,
but now for some reason it wasn’t being done. At the corner of our street I
saw Mama. She hurried towards me. She grabbed me by the shoulders and
then suddenly screamed: ‘Where’s Borya? Have you seen Borya?’
   ‘Over there!’ I pointed in the direction of Kreshchatik.
   ‘Go home!’ Mama said and ran off down the street.
   I stood and watched her go, and then went home. Our street was deserted
as usual. The lights were on in the windows, and I saw the lamp with the
green shade in my father’s study. Liza, our maid, stood next to the open
gate. She took my satchel and wiped my face.
   ‘Such a naughty boy, you’re always running off somewhere!’ she said.
‘It’s enough to drive one crazy. Come along, it’s time for a wash.’
   Only Galya and Dima were home. Galya was going from room to room
bumping into the furniture and asking over and over: ‘Where is everyone?
Where is everyone?’ Dima sat on the windowsill listening to the noises
outside. He hadn’t made it to the demonstrations, and he was hoping to
catch the sound of gunfire. He thought the windowsill would be the best
place. I got cleaned up, and Liza gave me some warm milk. I couldn’t stop
shuddering.
   ‘Did you see any dead bodies?’ Dima asked me.
   ‘Ugh . . .’ I stuttered, not sure what to say.
   ‘Leave him alone!’ Liza snapped. ‘Can’t you see the state he’s in?’
   Finally, Mama came home with Borya. He was all dirty and had lost his
hat. He had a strange smile on his face, as if he’d lost his hearing. Soon
after, the student Marković arrived. He told us that he’d seen many dead
and wounded. Mama let down the blinds on all the windows and told Liza
not to open the door to anyone without first making sure who it was. Then
Mama sent me to bed. Before lying down, I lifted the blind and looked out
into the street. The lamps still hadn’t been lit. An eerie grey light shone on
the rooftops. It was so quiet it seemed as if the city had died. A horseman
galloped down the neighbouring street, and then all was quiet again.
   I lowered the blind, undressed and got into bed. I gazed at the thick walls
and told myself our two-storey house was like a fortress. No bullet could
penetrate it. The greenish flame of my lamp crackled. I began to doze off,
and then I heard the doorbell and hurried steps, followed by my father’s
voice. He was pacing back and forth in the dining room, talking incessantly.
   The next morning Mama told me that I wasn’t to set foot beyond our
courtyard. I was so upset by this I decided not to leave the house at all. I
threw on my heavy coat and went out onto the balcony to read the Nekrasov
poem we’d been given as homework.1 All I managed to memorise were the
first two lines: ‘It is late autumn. The rooks have flown. The forest is bare,
the fields are empty.’ Everything distracted me. A fire brigade drove past.
Then Staff Captain Zadorozhny, a Black Hundred2 and a scoundrel who
lived in a wing of the house, came out of his door. He was wearing his grey
army greatcoat, a sword belt and a revolver which hung at his side. His
wife, tall and thin as an ironing board with dishevelled hair and dark circles
under her eyes, followed him out onto the steps. Her black Japanese kimono
with embroidered peacocks fluttered about her.
   Zadorozhny had recently returned from the Japanese war with two
massive trunks stuffed with lengths of silk, kimonos and even a curved
Chinese sword. ‘The Hero of Mukden!’ my father jokingly called
Zadorozhny.
   ‘Georges,’ his wife whined in an affected voice, ‘do keep in mind that I
worry.’
   ‘It’s nothing, my dear!’ Zadorozhny gallantly replied and then kissed her
hand. ‘We’re just going to put an end to this nonsense.’ And off he went
without a backward glance.
   The war with Japan had just ended, and we children were as upset and
indignant about it as the grown-ups. We heard their conversations about the
incompetence of our High Command, about ‘lazybones’ Kuropatkin, the
treachery of Stessel,3 the surrender of Port Arthur and the embezzlers in the
commissariats. Autocratic Russia had come unravelled like a piece of rotten
old cloth. At the same time we heard the grown-ups talk about the courage
and great tenacity of the Russian soldier, and about how things could not go
on like this any longer, for the people’s patience had reached its limit. The
worst blow for us had been the loss of the Russian fleet at Tsushima. Once
Borya showed me a piece of paper with some faint violet-coloured lines
copied on a hectograph. You could barely read it.
  ‘Is it a leaflet?’ I asked. I had already read several leaflets pasted on the
walls of our school.
  ‘No,’ Borya replied, ‘it’s a poem.’
  I could barely make out the beginning:

       Enough, enough, O heroes of Tsushima!
       You fell as the last victims.
       It’s close now, it’s at the door,
       Liberty for our native land!

   Liberty! At the time I still had only a vague notion of what that meant. I
imagined it to be like the allegorical painting that hung in Father’s study: a
wrathful but radiant young woman with a firm bare breast standing atop the
barricade. In one hand she held high a red banner and in the other she was
lighting a cannon with a smouldering fuse. This was Liberty. Crowding
around her were men in blue shirts with rifles in their hands, exhausted but
exultant women, little boys, and even a young poet in a tattered top hat, and
all of them singing with inspiration what must have been ‘La Marseillaise’:
‘To arms, citizens! Our day of glory has arrived!’
   To the beating of drums, the blowing of trumpets, Liberty strode
triumphantly across the land, greeted everywhere by the people’s riotous
cries. Behind Liberty walked a man very similar in appearance to the
student Marković – just as swarthy, with burning eyes. In his hand he held a
pistol. One day I had looked into Marković’s room through the balcony
window and saw him cleaning a black steel Browning while humming a
tune. Small brass bullets lay on an open medical textbook on his desk.
Marković saw me and immediately covered the Browning with a
newspaper.

                                       •

The next morning Liza removed the icons from the walls and placed them
in the windows facing the street. Ignaty, our porter, took some chalk and
drew a large cross on our front gates, which he then closed and bolted. We
found ourselves in a locked fortress. Mama said a pogrom against the Jews
had broken out in the city. ‘On orders from St Petersburg,’ she added. Liza
whispered that looters had descended on Vasilkovskaya Street and the
rioting was getting close to us. Marković left with Borya. Marković had
first put on his boots and student uniform, held tight with a belt. Mama
didn’t want to let Borya go, but Father snapped at her. And so, she made the
sign of the cross over Borya, gave him a kiss and let him go. As the two
descended the stairs, Mama kept begging Marković to look after him.
   ‘Where are they going?’ I asked Father.
   ‘To the Students’ Combat Brigade. To defend the Jews,’ he said.
   Father soon followed after Borya and Marković. Dima and I spent all
morning playing aimlessly in the yard. Around noon we heard gunshots.
The shooting quickly grew more intense. A fire broke out on Vasilkovskaya
Street. Charred bits of paper began falling into the yard. Later that day
Father brought home an old Jewish woman. She was in a state of confusion,
a kerchief slipping off her grey head, and she was holding a speechless boy
by the hand. We knew her son, the doctor. Mama went to see Ignaty in the
kitchen and gave him ten roubles. But Ignaty gave the money back to
Mama, saying: ‘I have already taken in Mendel the tailor and his whole
family. Better you just make certain Zadorozhny’s wife doesn’t notice
anything.’
   Towards evening a short youth in a black hat came to our gate. A wet
lock of hair hung down over his eyes. The shells of sunflower seeds stuck to
his chin. He was followed by a tall, clean-shaven man in short trousers and
a hat walking cautiously, along with a hatless fidgety man with swollen
eyes and a fat face and a stout woman in a heavy shawl. Coming up behind
these three was a group of thuggish-looking young men. We had seen the
woman often before at the Galitsky Market. Now she was carrying an
empty sack.
   ‘Open up!’ shouted the young fellow, pounding on the gate.
   ‘Ignaty came out from his lodgings.
   ‘Any Yids here?’ the fellow asked.
   ‘Sure, lots of them, just like you,’ Ignaty answered casually.
   ‘Taking in Yids, are ya?’ he screamed and shook the gate. ‘We know
what’s going on here. Open up!’
   ‘Just you wait, I’ll call Colonel Zadorozhny over,’ Ignaty threatened.
‘He’ll take care of you.’
   ‘I couldn’t care less about those Jerusalem colonels. We’ll make
mincemeat out of your colonel.’
   At this point, Madame Zadorozhnaya, who had been listening from her
window, could contain herself no longer. She came running across the
courtyard like an angry hen, the sleeves of her black kimono waving and
flapping as she went. ‘You scoundrel!’ she screamed and spat in his face
through the gate. ‘How dare you insult an officer of the Imperial Army?
You tramp! Vasily!’ she screeched. ‘Come here!’
   A dumbstruck orderly came running out. He grabbed an axe from the
woodshed and raced towards the gate. The youth jumped out of the way and
ran off down the street, turning round as he went to make sure the orderly
wasn’t chasing after him. His mates followed while the orderly shook the
axe at their backs.
   ‘The idea!’ said Madame Zadorozhnaya, wrapping herself in her kimono
and returning to her flat. ‘Every scoundrel is now going to start claiming
that he’s a real Russian. Excuse me, but no! Be forewarned no one is going
to get away with that this time!’
   Thus the wife of the Black Hundred so unexpectedly drove the raiders
from our door. The grown-ups laughed about this for a long time
afterwards.
   When the youth who’d run away stopped at a neighbour’s house and
began to pound on their gate, Dima dragged me up to our attic. There was
an enormous contraption up there that we’d dubbed the ‘Catapult’. It
comprised a thick rubber band that the children of the previous tenants had
nailed across the frame of a broken dormer window. I picked up off the
floor a piece of yellow brick. Dima secured it to the outside of the band and
together we pulled it back with all our might, aimed, and then launched the
brick at the young fellow. The brick whistled through the air across the
yard, knocking leaves off the trees, and landed at the feet of a tall old man
who was walking along the pavement. It exploded into tiny fragments.
We’d missed. Shocked, the old man dropped to the ground, then hopped up
and took off running, while the youth, his boots hammering the pavement,
followed.
   ‘Give me another brick!’ Dima shouted. But I was too slow, and the
youth had already managed to get away.
   ‘You didn’t pull straight back, and that’s why we missed,’ Dima said.
Dima always liked to blame others whenever something went wrong and
then argue about it for a long time.
   Even though we had missed, we were proud of our shot with the Catapult
for a long while after. That evening Liza brought porridge to Ignaty’s
lodgings for Mendel and his family. I went with her. All the windows had
been covered. Ignaty sat on a stool softly playing his accordion and singing
‘On the Hills of Manchuria’ from the Russo-Japanese War – ‘Around us it’s
calm, the hills, covered by mist . . .’ Mendel the tailor sat sewing a new
jacket with white thread by the light of a paraffin lamp while his family
slept.
   ‘They want to kill you,’ Ignaty said, ‘but you just go on sewing and
sewing. And rightly so. One’s got to earn a living.’
   Liza stood by the door and listened with growing sadness to Ignaty’s
singing: ‘High up, a lonely moon sheds its light upon the soldiers’
graves . . .’


1 Nikolai Nekrasov (1821–78), poet and critic popular with the liberal
intelligentsia.
2 The Black Hundreds were a collection of anti-revolutionary, anti-Semitic
and pro-autocracy groups.
3 Alexei Kuropatkin (1848–1925), imperial minister of war 1898–1904;
Anatoly Stessel (1848–1915), general and commander of the Port Arthur
garrison during the Russo-Japanese War (1904–5).

                             OceanofPDF.com
18
The Red Lantern



I lit the small red lantern. It had an oil lamp inside, and the lantern’s red
glass cast a crimson light on the dusty rubbish along the shelves lining the
narrow box room. I had begun to develop my father’s photographs. Father
had a small Kodak. He loved to take pictures, but the film canisters would
end up lying around for months in a box in his desk drawer. Before every
large holiday, the house was cleaned from top to bottom, and Mama would
take out the canisters and give them to me to develop.
    I enjoyed the work since I never could guess what would appear on the
negatives. I also liked the fact that no one, not even Mama, dared to enter
the room until I was done. I was cut off from the world. The usual
household sounds – the clattering of plates, the chiming of clocks, the
piercing voice of our maid Liza – were barely audible inside the room.
    A papier-mâché mask hung on the wall. It was the mask of a clown with
a snub nose and big, puffy cheeks that reminded me of pinecones. A reddish
tuft of oakum poked out from under a small white top hat cocked on its
head. In the red glow of the lantern the mask came to life. The clown peered
down into the black basin where the film lay in the developer. He even
winked at me. He smelled of paste. Sometimes our flat would become
utterly quiet – as happens even in the noisiest of families. In those moments
I couldn’t stand being alone with the clown in the narrow room. Little by
little I began to study his character. I knew that the clown liked making fun
of people, that nothing in life was sacred to him, and that in the end he
would have his revenge on us for keeping him in the box room for his entire
life. At times it even seemed to me that the clown was so bored by the
silence that he would actually mutter something to himself or even sing a
strange little song:
  ’Twas on a Sunday that the hens swallowed the cock whole, While
  nonsense sat mute on the fence mixing jam in a bottomless bowl.

   But all I had to do was open the box room’s door and let in the bluish
daylight, and in an instant the clown was dead and covered with dust.
   This time it was my father who brought me several canisters and asked
me to develop them. He had just returned from a trip to Moscow. It was the
beginning of January 1906. My father had been in Moscow in the final days
of the December uprising. He told us about the barricades in Presnya, the
armed bands of revolutionaries and the artillery fire. Despite the failure of
the uprising, my father returned home excited and invigorated. He was fully
certain that just beyond the horizon lay the moment when all Russia would
rise up and seize its long-awaited freedom.
   ‘Do your best job with these,’ he said. ‘I’ve got some photographs in here
of Moscow that are of historical significance. Thing is I just don’t
remember which canister they’re in.’
   The canisters were identical. My father hadn’t bothered to mark them. I
had no choice but to develop them one by one and see what I might find.
There were no photographs of Moscow on the first roll, just a few pictures
of a small, thin man in a short jacket and bow-tie. He was standing next to a
wall with a long, narrow painting hanging on it. For a long time I couldn’t
make anything out on this painting. Eventually, I saw an emaciated, hook-
nosed face with enormous, sad eyes. The face was ringed with bird feathers.
   My father asked from the other side of the door: ‘Well? Any Moscow
photographs?’
   ‘Not yet. Just some old man standing next to a painting on a wall.’
   ‘That’s Vrubel, of course! Don’t you remember him? Be sure not to
overdevelop it.’
   None of the painting’s details came out. Just the face and some of the
feathers.
   ‘I really want that photograph,’ said my father. ‘That’s his Demon.’
   Father left. Then I remembered how he had once said to Mama over
breakfast that Mikhail Alexandrovich Vrubel had come to Kiev for a few
days and had asked Father to visit him at his hotel.
   ‘I don’t understand your fascination with Vrubel,’ Mama said. ‘He’s just
another one of those Decadents! All those obsessed artists frighten me.’
   Nevertheless, my father went to see Vrubel and took me with him. We
entered the hotel near the Golden Gate and went up to the fourth floor. The
hallway had that hotel morning smell of eau-de-Cologne and coffee. My
father knocked on a low door. A thin man in a worn jacket opened the door.
His face, hair and eyes were of the same colour as his jacket – grey with
yellowish flecks. This was Vrubel, the artist.
   ‘Who’s this young subject?’ he asked, gripping me firmly by the chin.
‘Your son? This boy was practically made to be painted.’
   He took my father by the arm and led him to a table. I looked timidly
around the room. It was a garret. A few watercolours were pinned to the
dark wallpaper. Vrubel poured my father and himself a brandy, which he
quickly drank before getting up and pacing about the room. The heels of his
shoes clicked loudly on the parquet. I noticed his heels were very high. My
father made some compliment about the watercolours.
   ‘Junk!’ Vrubel replied. He stopped pacing about the room and sat back
down at the table. ‘I’ve been nothing but a bundle of nerves lately, like
some squirrel in a cage,’ he said. ‘I’m making myself sick. Georgy
Maximovich, what do you say we go to Lukyanovka?’
   ‘To St Cyril’s Church?’
   ‘Yes. I want to look at my work there. I’ve completely forgotten it.’
   Father agreed. The three of us took a droshky to Lukyanovka. We rode
for a long time down the endless Lvovskaya Street and then the just as
endless Dorogozhitskaya Street. Vrubel and my father smoked. I watched
Vrubel and felt sorry for him. He twitched and jerked the whole time. His
eyes darted about aimlessly, he spoke incoherently, he lit one cigarette after
another and then threw them out of the droshky without bothering to smoke
them. My father spoke to him gently as to a child. We got out of the
droshky near the Fëdorovskaya Church and then walked through the streets
and gardens of Lukyanovka. We came out to the edge of a ravine. From
here the road zigzagged down to the bottom, where we could make out the
small cupola of St Cyril’s Church.
   ‘Let’s sit for a while,’ Vrubel suggested.
   We sat down on the dirty grass growing along the side of the road. The
sky over the Dnieper was a dull blue.
   ‘I’m in a bad way, Georgy Maximovich,’ said Vrubel, slapping his flabby
cheek and laughing. ‘I’m tired of dragging around this disgusting shell of
mine.’
   Obviously, I didn’t understand what Vrubel meant by this, and I never
would have remembered this conversation if my father had not recounted it
to Mama, and then to Uncle Kolya, and a few acquaintances as well, and if
they had all not felt so sorry for Vrubel.
   Inside the church Vrubel examined his frescos in silence. They looked to
me as if they had been moulded out of pieces of blue, red and yellow clay. I
couldn’t believe that this skinny little man could have painted such large
images on the church walls.
   ‘Now that’s painting!’ Vrubel exclaimed as we left the church.
   I was shocked that Father reacted calmly to these words and even agreed
with Vrubel when he never allowed me or my brothers to say a single
boastful word. So when we parted with Vrubel on Reitarskaya Street, I told
my father that I didn’t like him.
   ‘Why?’ Father asked.
   ‘He’s a braggart.’
   ‘You little fool!’ said Father, slapping me on the back. ‘Stand up
straight!’
   ‘Why am I a fool?’ I asked, offended.
   ‘First of all,’ he said, ‘you need to know that Vrubel is a great artist.
Someday you’ll realise this. Second, you also need to know he’s sick. He’s
mentally unbalanced. Finally, you need to know one golden rule – never
make a hasty judgement of someone. If you do, you’re sure to regret it later.
Now stop slouching once and for all! I didn’t say anything the least bit
insulting.’
   Even after I had developed the photograph it was difficult to make out
anything in the painting behind Vrubel’s back. All I knew was that it was
called The Demon.
   I saw the painting for the first time much later, in the winter of 1911, in
the Tretyakov Gallery. Icy clouds hung in the Moscow air. Steam poured
from the swinging doors of the taverns. Amid this cosy winter scene, the
city’s boulevards encased in snow and ice, its windows frosted with rime
and tinged with the greenish glow of gaslights, Vrubel’s painting sparkled
like a blue diamond, like some jewel from the icy peaks of the Caucasus. It
hung in the gallery as if alive and absorbed the entire space into its cold
beauty and its grandeur of human longing. I stood before The Demon
Downcast for a long time. Slowly it began to dawn on me that the
contemplation of such paintings not only produced visual pleasure but
evoked from the depths of one’s consciousness thoughts and ideas of whose
existence one had never even been aware.
   I thought of Lermontov. I imagined him walking into the Tretyakov
Gallery, his spurs softly jangling, casually tossing his grey coat to the
attendant in the vestibule’s cloakroom, and then stopping to stare at The
Demon Downcast with his gloomy eyes. It was he who wrote those bitter
words about himself: ‘Like the flame of a shooting star in the night sky, I
am of no use to this world.’ But my God, how wrong he was! How the
world needs the brief flames of shooting stars, for man does not live by
bread alone. He considered himself a captive of the world. He wasted the
passion of his soul in the desert. But the desert blossomed after this and was
brought to life by the power of his poetry, by his anger, his anguish and his
knowledge of joy. For it was he, after all, who shyly confessed: ‘From
under the bush, a silvery lily of the valley nods her head in friendship.’ And
who knows, maybe the biting, rarefied air of the mountain heights,
sprinkled with the demon’s blood, also holds a faint hint of the scent of that
welcoming woodland flower. And Lermontov, like that downcast demon,
was perhaps just a child denied what he so desperately sought from life:
freedom, justice and love.

                                      •

‘Well, found any Moscow photos yet?’ Father asked once more from behind
the door.
    His voice brought me out of my reverie. I started to develop the next roll
and forgot about Vrubel. Images of Moscow streets and small houses
covered in snow began to appear. Low barricades constructed out of barrels,
boards, rocks and shop signs blocked the streets. Civilians holding rifles
and revolvers stood next to the barricades. Then came images of tall
buildings damaged by shells, the Gorbaty Bridge, the Zoological Garden
clouded by dense smoke, bullet-riddled tavern signs, overturned trams.
Everything was obscured by the winter haze, and nothing I did helped. No
developer could dispel this haze and lend sharpness to the photographs. But
the haze captured the atmosphere of the uprising most effectively. It was as
if the photographs gave off a whiff of gunpowder and smoke.
    Uprising! The word sounded so strange in the seemingly patriarchal
Moscow of those days. I had read stories about the Indian Mutiny, I knew
about the uprising of the Commune in Paris, the Decembrists’ Rebellion,
but the Moscow uprising seemed to me the most powerful and the most
romantic. I got out a map of Moscow. Father showed me the places where
the fighting had taken place and where the barricades had been erected –
Chistye Prudy, Samotëka, Kudrinskaya Square, Malaya and Bolshaya
Gruzinskaya Streets, Presnya and Gorbaty Bridge. These names have held a
special fascination for me ever since as places that became historically
significant in my own lifetime. Everything associated with the uprising
became important – the icy Moscow winter, the tea houses where the rebels
met, the intermingling of elements of ancient Moscow with the new era
signalled by the uprising. Droshky drivers in their ragged old cloth coats,
the gilded biscuits over the bakers’ shops, the street vendors with their hot
pies, and then amid all this – the whistling of bullets, the rushing about of
armed men, the flash of steel revolvers, red flags and the words of ‘The
Song of Warsaw’ – ‘Assailed by hostile whirlwinds on all sides, oppressed
most sinisterly by dark forces . . .’ In all of it there was the poetry of
struggle and the breath of freedom, which though approaching still lay
shrouded in fog like a winter’s dawn. And there was courage and faith and
hope. Across the enormous expanse of the country, Russians followed the
glow of the fires in Presnya and awaited the victory of the rebels. The
uprising was like a winter storm – a harbinger of future whirlwinds and
purifying upheavals. Today I can describe the elevated mood that seized me
at the time, but back then I could only feel but not explain it.
   The following day I made prints of all the photographs and gave them to
my father. It was dark outside, and the lamp burned in his study. The light
fell on the familiar objects on his desk – the steel steam-engine model, the
statuette of Pushkin with his curly whiskers and the stacks of satirical
revolutionary magazines – there were many of them in those days. Most
prominent of all, standing in the place of honour, was a picture postcard
with a portrait of Lieutenant Schmidt in a black cloak fastened with lion-
head clasps.1 Father lay on the sofa reading a newspaper. He looked at all
the photographs and said: ‘An incredible country! Vrubel and an uprising!
All here living together side by side like neighbours, and all leading to one
thing.’
   ‘To what?’
   ‘It’s all leading to a better future. You’ll see a great many interesting
things in your life, Kostik. If, that is, you grow up to become an interesting
person.’


1Lieutenant Pëtr Schmidt (1867–1906), one of the leaders of the uprising in
Sevastopol during the revolution of 1905, for which he was executed.

                            OceanofPDF.com
19
Deserted Tauris



That summer of 1906, after I turned fourteen, Mama insisted that instead of
Rëvny we spend the summer in Crimea. She chose the quietest of the
Crimean towns – Alushta. We travelled by way of Odessa. The hotels in
Odessa were all full, so we had to stay at the guest house of the Athos
Monastery near the railway station. The novices – pale youths in cassocks
with black patent-leather belts – served us cabbage soup and dried
anchovies. I fell in love with everything – the cabbage soup, the beautiful
white city, the sparkling seltzer water, the port. Grey clouds of pigeons
circled in the air over the city, mixing with the white clouds of seagulls.
Once again, I had come to visit the sea, although here, on the edge of the
steppe, it seemed gentler somehow than on the coasts of the Caucasus.
   An old steamer, the Pushkin, took us to Yalta. The sea was dead calm.
The oak gunwales were too hot to touch. Everything in the saloon shook
and rattled from the steamer’s screw. The sun shone through the skylights,
portholes and open doors. The intensity of the southern sun overwhelmed
me. It made everything sparkle. Even the rough canvas sailcloth covering
the portholes flickered like a flame. Crimea rose up out of the sea’s blue
depths like a Treasure Island. Clouds hovered over the lilac mountain
peaks. The white port of Sevastopol sailed slowly towards us and greeted
our old steamer with a midday cannon salute and the blue crosses of St
Andrew’s flags.
   The Pushkin seethed and shuddered for a long time in the bay, sending up
fountains of bubbles and roiling water, as she turned this way and that. We
ran from one side of the boat to the other so as not to miss a thing. There
was Malakhov Hill, the Bratskoe Cemetery, the Count’s Quay, Fort
Konstantin, thrusting out into the breakers, and the mutinous cruiser
Ochakov surrounded by pontoons. Naval cutters shot past us, throwing up
wakes of malachite water. I looked at it all spellbound. It was all true and
not simply something that existed in the books I had read – this city where
Nakhimov had died,1 where cannonballs had exploded on the bastions,
where the artillerist Leo Tolstoy had battled, where Lieutenant Schmidt had
pledged his oath to the people. Here it was before me, this city, in the
burning heat of the sun and the feathery shadows of the acacias.
   The Pushkin reached Yalta in the evening. It slowly motored into the
harbour as if entering a softly lit bower on a summer’s eve. We
disembarked at a stone pier. The first thing that caught my eye was a
swarthy pedlar with a cart. He had hung a lantern on top of a pole that
shone a light on his downy peaches and large plums covered with a greyish
bloom. We bought some peaches and headed off for the Dzhalita Hotel,
followed by porters lugging our baggage. I was so tired I fell asleep as soon
as I got to the room, not even noticing the centipede hiding in the corner or
the black cypresses outside the windows. For a fleeting moment I heard the
soft voice of the fountain in the courtyard, but then sleep enveloped me and
carried me off in a gently rocking ship’s cabin to some magical land as
mysterious as Crimea itself.
   After Yalta with its magnificent seafront, Alushta, farther up the coast,
struck me as dull. We settled on the edge of town, out beyond the
Stakheevskaya embankment. There was nothing in the area but stony
ground, thickets of strong-smelling thuya, the empty sea and the distant low
mountains of Sudak. That is all there was in Alushta. But even this turned
out to be enough, and I gradually reconciled myself to Alushta and then fell
in love with it.
   Galya and I often visited the neighbouring vineyard to buy the sweet-
tasting shashla grapes, the strong, crisp chaush and pink muscats. The
vineyard was full of singing cicadas. Tiny yellow flowers the size of
pinheads grew all over the ground. An elderly woman by the name of Anna
Petrovna lived there in a small white house. Her face was so tanned from
the sun that her grey eyes looked white against her skin. She cut bunches of
grapes from the vine for us. Sometimes she sent her daughter out to do it.
Lena, a barefoot seventeen-year-old girl, had sun-kissed plaits arranged like
a wreath on her head and her mother’s grey eyes. The adults called her ‘the
mermaid’. Lena often passed our cottage at dusk on her way down to the
sea. She bathed and swam for a long time, before returning with a towel
over her shoulders and singing:
       Out there in the wide blue sea,
       In the azure waters of our tomorrows,
       We’ll forget our grief,
       And our earthly sorrows.

   Galya made friends with Lena and learned everything she could about
her. Galya always did love to question people about every last detail of their
lives. She did this with the doggedness of a shortsighted and inquisitive
person.
   It turned out that Anna Petrovna was a widow, a former librarian from
Chernigov, and after Lena had fallen ill with tuberculosis her doctor had
recommended that they move to Crimea. Anna Petrovna had moved to
Alushta, where she had married an old Ukrainian, the owner of the
vineyard. The old man died soon after and so Anna Petrovna and Lena were
the sole proprietors of the vineyard. Lena lived in Yalta in the winter and
attended the gymnasium there but returned to Alushta every Sunday to see
her mother. She was by now fully recovered from her illness.
   Lena planned to become a singer after finishing school. Galya tried to
talk her out of it. In her opinion, the only worthy occupation for a woman
was teaching. Galya herself wanted to become a village schoolteacher. We
were all tired of listening to Galya talk about this, especially since she
would go on and on about her calling and kept insisting that there was no
better occupation in the world than pedagogy even though none of us ever
disagreed with her. Something about Galya’s attempts to change Lena’s
mind made me angry. I loved the theatre. To spite Galya I loved to tell Lena
about all the amazing plays I had seen: The Blue Bird, A Month in the
Country, Madame Sans-Gêne, Woe from Wit.
   I exaggerated a great deal. I predicted an alluring future for Lena. I liked
to imagine that someday this thin, tanned girl, who swam better than any
sailor, would make her way onto the stage dressed in an elegant dress with a
long train, her bronzed skin showing through her makeup and a dark flower
trembling on her breast as she sang. I wove my unrestrained daydreams
around Lena. She listened to me, her head thrown back as if by the weight
of her plaits, faintly blushing. Now and then she would ask: ‘Oh, admit it,
you’re just making all this up? Right? Admit it. I won’t be angry.’
   She addressed me with ‘vy’, the formal ‘you’, even though she was only
three years older than me. In those days only the closest of friends used ‘ty’,
the informal ‘you’.
   I could not admit it since I truly believed in everything I imagined. This
habit of mine would be the cause of many future troubles. And what was
most astounding to me is that I have never met anyone in my entire life who
made any effort to try to understand my habit or at least to try to excuse it.
But Lena believed me. She wanted to believe everything I told her. If I
didn’t go with Galya to the vineyard for two or three days, Lena would
bring us grapes herself, saying shyly to Mama: ‘Anna Petrovna told me to
give you these as a gift.’ Then she’d steal a moment and quickly whisper to
me: ‘You’re simply horrid! Why have you been staying away?’
   Father did not stay long in Alushta. He had business to attend to in St
Petersburg. Next, Borya left – he had to sit his entrance exams for the Kiev
Polytechnical Institute. Father’s departure upset Mama for some reason, and
she stopped paying us any attention. She preferred it when we would simply
disappear for the entire day down by the seaside, never even thinking to
worry about us. I spent my days in the sea up to my waist in water hunting
for crabs under the rocks. This ended one day after I stayed in the water
until late in the evening and caught a cold that turned into pneumonia. To
make matters worse, that first night as I lay bed with a fever, I was stung by
a scolopendra.
   August came. The school year was soon to start. We would have to return
to Kiev. My illness upset all our plans. In the end, Mama sent Galya home
with Dima and she remained with me in Alushta. I was seriously ill and for
a long time. I could barely sleep at night. It hurt to breathe. I had to take
slow, shallow breaths as I lay staring miserably at the room’s white walls.
Centipedes crawled in and out of the walls’ cracks. A lamp burned on the
table. The shadows cast by the medicine bottles formed prehistoric
monsters, their long necks stretching up to the ceiling.
   I turned away and looked at the black window. It reflected the light from
my lamp. I could hear the rumbling of the sea outside. A moth beat against
the glass. It was trying to escape the stuffy, medicinal smell of my room.
Mama was sleeping in the next room. I called to her to ask for some water
and to let the moth out. She opened the window and it flew away, and after
that I calmed down. But then, I don’t know how, but I saw that the moth
had landed on the dry grass just outside, where it rested briefly before
flying back through the window into my room. It looked huge now, the size
of an owl. It settled on my chest. The moth felt so heavy on me, like a stone
big enough to crush my heart. I called to Mama again and asked her to get
rid of the moth. Her lips pursed, Mama removed the hot compress from my
forehead and wrapped a blanket around me.
   I lost count of the nights filled with a strange droning and the dry heat of
the bedclothes. One day Lena came to see me. At first, I didn’t realise it was
her. She was wearing a brown school dress, a black pinafore and small
black shoes. Her fair hair had been neatly plaited and hung down on either
side of her suntanned face. She had come to say farewell before her
departure for Yalta. When Mama left the room, Lena put her hand on my
forehead. It was as cold as ice. The end of one of her plaits brushed my
face. I caught the warm, fresh scent of her hair. Mama returned. Lena
quickly removed her hand, and Mama said that Lena had brought me some
wonderful grapes.
   ‘I’m afraid these were the best we had,’ Lena replied. She was looking
not at Mama, but at me, as if there was something important she wanted to
say. Then she left. I heard her running down the stairs. Everyone had
departed, and so every little sound reverberated clearly in the empty house.
   From that day on I began to improve. The doctor said that even after I
was well enough to get out of bed, I would have to remain in Alushta for at
least two months, until the beginning of November. I needed to rest and
regain my strength. And so, Mama decided to have Liza sent down from
Kiev to look after me. Mama was in a hurry to get back to Kiev, although I
still don’t know why. A week later Liza arrived and the next day Mama
took the horse-drawn coach to Simferopol. Liza gasped at every last thing.
Mama had brought Liza to Kiev from the Bryansk woods, from Rëvny, and
she had never before seen the sea, cypress trees or vineyards. I remained
with Liza. I could get out of bed but wasn’t allowed to leave the house. I
spent the days reading on the glass-enclosed terrace under a cool autumn
sun. I had found a copy of Tristan and Isolde in a chest of drawers. I read
this marvellous legend several times, and each reading left me sadder and
sadder. I decided to try to write my own legend in the spirit of Tristan and
Isolde and spent several days working on it. In the end, I didn’t get any
further than a description of a stormy sea and the rocky shore.
   At the end of September, the doctor finally gave me permission to go
outside. I wandered about deserted Alushta all by myself. I loved going out
to the wharf when the sea was rough and the waves came crashing in and
shot up through the gaps in the wooden jetty. Once I visited Anna Petrovna.
She served me coffee and said that I must come and visit again on Sunday
because Lena was planning on returning home that day from Yalta. I
couldn’t wait for Sunday to arrive and to see Lena.
   To this very day I still remember that Sunday as if it were yesterday
thanks to two events.
   I knew that Lena was arriving from Yalta on the morning cutter. I went
down to the jetty to wait for her. But as soon as the cutter appeared around
the cape, I hid behind the old wooden kiosk where they sold picture
postcards of Crimea. I sat down on a rock and didn’t move as the cutter
moored at the jetty. Lena walked off and looked about for a familiar face
and then, seeing none, slowly began walking towards home. I was afraid
she’d see me. The whole thing was utterly foolish. She looked back a few
times and then returned to the jetty and stood about for a time pretending to
read some old posters that hung down in tattered strips from a signpost. I
watched her furtively. She wore a heavy kerchief over her head. She had
grown thin and pale in Yalta. She didn’t move from the posters, but quickly
stopped pretending to be reading them and dropped her eyes to the ground.
Then she started for home again. This time for good. I waited a bit before
walking home myself. I was ashamed of what a coward I had been.
   I didn’t know whether or not I should go and see Lena. I couldn’t eat any
dinner. Liza threatened to telegraph Mama about this, but seeing as how she
could hardly read, I wasn’t too worried.
   After dinner I screwed up my courage, put on my coat and headed out.
Liza shouted at me to button up my coat, but I paid no attention. I
approached the vineyard. It was already bathed in crimson. I opened the
gate. Just then the door to the white house flew open, and there was Lena.
She was running towards me in nothing but her dress.
   It was a good day. I overcame my shyness and told her all about Rëvny,
my geography teacher Cherpunov and Aunt Nadya. Lena kept
surreptitiously piling grapes and plums, greengages, on my plate. Then she
said: ‘Why didn’t you bother to button your coat in this cold weather? Who
are you trying to impress, you little dandy?’
   ‘What about you? You ran out without any coat, just in your dress!’
   ‘Because . . .’ she said, and then hesitated. ‘Because . . . I didn’t have
pneumonia.’
   She blushed. Anna Petrovna looked at Lena over her spectacles and
shook her head. ‘Lena, don’t forget you’re no child anymore. You’re
seventeen now.’ She said this as if Lena were already a grown woman and
well past such foolishness.
   Anna Petrovna and Lena walked me back and came in to see how I was
getting by without Mama. Liza, embarrassed, turned red but quickly
recovered herself and began to tell Anna Petrovna how disobedient I was
and how I had left without bothering to button my coat. Anna Petrovna told
her to come to her for anything she might need. Liza was delighted. She
didn’t know a soul in Alushta. Once in a while she would go for walks with
me and pick worm-wood which she hung up to dry in her room. The rest of
the time she played patience. Liza had red cheeks and kind, puffy eyes. She
was hopelessly naïve and believed whatever nonsense she was told.
   Anna Petrovna and Lena left. I became bored. A long evening lay ahead
of me. I wanted to go back to their house by the vineyard, but I knew this
kind of thing ‘wasn’t done’. So I decided to go back to my story. I lit the
lamp and sat down at the desk. But instead of a story, I began to write my
first poem. I no longer remember it, except for the first line which has stuck
in my memory: ‘Oh, pick the flowers on the drooping stems . . .’
   I liked the poem. I decided to keep writing late into the night, but Liza
came in. ‘What is this?’ she said. ‘You’ll ruin your eyes! Besides, it’s long
past your bedtime!’ With that, she blew out the light.
   I lost my temper. ‘I’m not a baby anymore,’ I said, and then called her an
idiot. Liza burst into tears and went to her room. In a pathetic voice she
said, ‘I’m leaving tomorrow for Kiev, on foot. You can do what you like
here on your lonesome.’
   I was quiet. Then Liza said she was going to send Mama a telegram
tomorrow informing her of my behaviour. She muttered on and on to herself
for a long time and then said with a sigh: ‘Well, whatever. I’m done with
the entire business. Go to sleep. Oh my, and what a horrible wind there is
tonight on top of all this!’
   A round wall clock hung over my head. Every time it struck two o’clock
in the morning it woke me up. It happened again this morning and for a
long time I could not understand what had happened. A crimson light was
flickering on my wall. My window looked out onto the sea. Outside, the
wind was howling. I sat up in bed and looked out of the window. A faint
glow along the horizon lit up the low clouds and the rough water. I began to
dress quickly.
   ‘Liza!’ I shouted. ‘There’s a fire out at sea!’
   I heard her move, jump out of bed and also begin to throw on her clothes.
   ‘What could possibly burn out on the water?’ she asked.
   ‘I don’t know.’
   ‘Then why did you get up?’ She was still half asleep and confused.
   ‘I’m going down to the shore.’
   ‘I’ll come too.’
   We went out. The wind rushed around the house and hit me with a cold
blast. The glow had spread higher up into the sky. The local Tatar man who
looked after the cottage was standing by the gate. ‘A steamer’s on fire,’ he
said. ‘It’s horrible, but what can we do?’
   We ran down to the shore. A bell, perhaps from the lifeboat station, was
clanging near the jetty. Crowds stood all along the seashore, and I
immediately lost Liza in the darkness. Fishermen in high boots and oilskins
were dragging a boat over the pebbly beach to the water. I heard snatches of
agitated voices: ‘A passenger ship . . . Two miles out . . . Hold tight to the
stern, all right? Don’t let her roll . . .’ The wet fishermen hopped into the
boat and grabbed the oars. The boat rode up onto a wave and headed out to
the open sea. Someone took me by the elbow. I turned round. Lena was
standing beside me. In the faint glow I could see a stern look on her face.
We stood in silence on the edge of the jetty. A white flare went up over the
sea, then another.
   ‘That means help’s on the way,’ said Lena. ‘If it weren’t for Mama, I
would have gone with the fishermen in the lifeboat. I really mean it.’
   She was silent for a moment and then asked: ‘When are you leaving?’
   For the first time she stopped addressing me with the formal ‘you’. My
heart skipped a beat.
   ‘In a week, I guess.’
   ‘So I’ll still get to see you again. I’ll try to come by a bit earlier.’
   ‘Please do, I really want to see you too,’ I answered, feeling as though
with these frightful words I had fallen off a cliff.
   ‘What should I do?’ she asked, softly. ‘Mama is frightened. She’s here
somewhere, over by the quay. You’re not angry with me, are you?’
   ‘What for?’
   She didn’t answer.
   ‘Lena!’ Anna Petrovna called from out of the darkness. ‘Where are you?
We’re going home!’
   ‘I’m leaving tomorrow by the early coach,’ Lena whispered. ‘Don’t think
of seeing me off. Goodbye.’
   She shook my hand and left. I watched her go. For a few seconds I
managed to follow the white kerchief on her head before it vanished.
   The glow upon the sea dimmed. It was replaced by the green ray of a
searchlight. It came from the destroyer Intrepid that was on her way to help
the burning steamer. I found Liza, and we returned home. I wanted to lie
down and fall asleep as soon as possible to keep from thinking about that
amazing and wonderful moment that had just taken place between Lena and
me. In the morning, when the glow had been replaced by some wispy
smoke, I went down to the quay and learned that the steamer had been lost.
People said that a bomb had exploded in the hold, but the captain had
managed to beach the steamer on some rocks offshore.
   Upon hearing the news, I walked a long way down the road to Yalta. Just
an hour earlier Lena had ridden in the coach along this same road. I sat
down on the parapet overlooking the sea and stayed there for a long time
with my hands tucked into the sleeves of my overcoat. I thought about
Lena, and this made my heart ache. I recalled the smell of her hair, the fresh
warmth of her breath, the troubled look in her grey eyes and the thin arch of
her eyebrows. I couldn’t understand what was happening to me. A terrible
longing gripped me, and I burst into tears. I wanted only one thing – to see
her, to hear her voice, to be near her.
   I had just about decided to walk to Yalta when a cart came rattling around
the bend. I quickly wiped my eyes and turned to look at the sea. But all of a
sudden they filled with tears again, and I could see nothing but a bright blue
smudge. I was chilled to the bone and couldn’t stop shaking. The driver of
the cart, an old man in a straw hat, stopped his horses and said: ‘Climb in,
my friend, I’ll take you to Alushta.’
   I climbed into the cart. The old man looked over his shoulder and asked:
‘You’re not from the orphanage, are you?’
   ‘No, I’m a pupil at the gymnasium,’ I said.
   The last days in Alushta were unusually sad and beautiful, as it always is
in those places we are sorry to have to leave. Fog rolled in from the sea,
leaving the grass wet in front of our cottage. The sun seeped through the
fog. Liza fed yellow acacia wood into the stove. The leaves were falling.
But they weren’t golden, as at home in Kiev, but greyish with lilac-coloured
veins. Waves rolled silently out of the fog and onto the shore and then
silently back. Dead seahorses lay on the shingle. The peaks of Chatyr-Dag
and Babugan-Yaila were wrapped in clouds. Fierce dogs glancing about
distrustfully herded flocks of sheep down from the mountains. The autumn
fog made everything so still that standing on my balcony I could hear
voices coming from the village far down below. The flames of the braziers
glowed in the market inn, and the smell of burnt fat and roast mullet hung
in the air.
   Liza and I had plans to leave on Monday morning. Liza had already hired
a driver to take us to Simferopol. I waited for Lena all Saturday, but she
never came. I walked past the vineyard several times but saw no one.
Sunday morning there was still no sign of her. I walked over to the coach
station. It was empty. Worried, I went home. Liza handed me an envelope.
   ‘Some boy dropped it off,’ she said. ‘It must be from Anna Petrovna. I
expect they want you to come over and to say goodbye. You should go.
They’re nice people.’
   I went into the garden, ripped open the envelope and took out a strip of
paper. ‘Come to the three plane trees at six. Lena.’
   I got to the three plane trees not at six but at five. It was a deserted place.
The three plane trees stood in a rocky ravine near a dried-up stream.
Everything around was withered other than a few scattered tulips that had
somehow managed to bloom. There must have been a garden here at some
time. A small wooden bridge had been put up over the stream. At the base
of one of the trees stood a rickety bench, its metal legs covered in rust. Even
though I had come early, Lena was already there. She was sitting on the
bench, her hands clasped between her knees. Her kerchief had fallen from
her head onto her shoulders. She turned round when I approached.
   ‘You won’t understand,’ she said, taking my hand. ‘No, pay no attention
to me . . . I’m always talking a lot of nonsense.’
   Lena stood up. She smiled apologetically. She lowered her eyes and
glanced up at me sullenly. ‘Mama says I’m mad. Well, whatever! Farewell!’
   She grabbed me by my shoulders, pulled me towards her and kissed me
on the lips. Gently pushing me away, she said: ‘Now go! And don’t look
back! Please. Just go!’ Tears welled in her eyes. One rolled down her cheek
and left a narrow, wet streak.
   And so I went. But I couldn’t stop myself from looking back. Lena was
holding onto the trunk of the tree, her head back as if from the weight of her
plaits. She was watching me.
   ‘Go on!’ she screamed. Her voice sounded strange. ‘It’s just a load of
nonsense!’
   I left. It was already getting dark. The sun was setting behind Kastel
Mountain. The wind blew from the Yaila, rustling the dry leaves. I didn’t
realise at the time that it was finished, all over. Only much later did I come
to understand that for some unknown reason life had taken from me then
something that might have been happiness.
   The next morning Liza and I left for Simferopol. Rain was pouring in the
forests around Chatyr-Dag and it lashed the windows of our carriage all the
way back to Kiev. No one took any notice of my return home. Something
bad had happened to our family. But at the time I didn’t know what. I was
actually glad no one paid me any attention. I spent all my time thinking
about Lena, but I never could bring myself to write to her.
   I did not return to Crimea again until 1921. By then everything that had
happened between us was just a memory, one that no longer caused any
pain but led me to reflect. We all have these moments of reflection,
although I wonder whether they’re worth talking about.


1   Pavel Nakhimov (1802–55), Russian admiral killed in the Crimean War.

                              OceanofPDF.com
20
Ruin



After our family’s Crimean holiday everything suddenly changed. Father
had an argument with the head of the South-West Railway. He quit his job
and our financial well-being came to an immediate end.
   We moved from Nikolsko-Botanicheskaya to Podvalnaya – ‘Cellar’ –
Street, where, as if fate were mocking us, we took a basement flat. We lived
off whatever personal belongings Mama could sell. Silent men in sheepskin
hats appeared with ever greater frequency in our dark, chilly rooms. Their
sharp eyes roamed about the flat, taking in our furniture, paintings and the
china laid out on the table, and they discussed business quietly and
confidently with Mama and went off. An hour or two later a cart would
drive into the courtyard and soon depart with a chest of drawers, a table, a
mirror, a rug.
   In the mornings we would find a Tatar man in a black quilted skullcap in
our kitchen. We called him ‘Shurum-Burum’. He would be squatting and
examining Father’s trousers and jackets or some sheet in the light. Shurum-
Burum liked to haggle for a long time, leave and then come back, which
drove Mama to fits of anger. Finally, Shurum-Burum would agree and
shake on the deal, pull out a fat wallet from his pocket, and, after spitting
delicately on his fingers, count out his torn banknotes.
   Father was almost never at home. He left early in the morning and
returned after we were asleep. Where he spent his days, none of us knew.
Apparently, he was looking for work. Mama aged overnight. She stopped
taking care of her hair. Grey strands hung down over her face. Borya left us
and took a room at the Progress boarding house near the railway station,
ostensibly since it was closer to the Polytechnical Institute. In truth, he left
because he no longer got along with Father, whom he blamed for all our
misfortune, and he didn’t want to live in our depressing surroundings on
Podvalnaya Street. Borya kept himself by giving lessons, but he couldn’t
spare any money to help us. Dima also gave lessons or, as it was then
called, worked as a ‘tutor’. I alone was too young to give lessons, and
Galya was so short-sighted that the only thing she could do was to help
Mama around the house. We had to let Liza go.
   One morning the porter brought in a gaunt, creaky old man who turned
out to be a bailiff. He impounded almost all of our remaining possessions to
cover mysterious debts that Father had kept hidden from Mama. Now it all
came out into the open. After that Father took the first job he could get – an
awful position at a sugar factory near Kiev – and moved out. We were left
on our own. Grief overtook us. Our family was dying, and I understood this.
This was especially difficult for me after Crimea, after my short, sad love
affair with Lena, after my happy childhood. Once a month Uncle Kolya sent
money to Mama from Bryansk. Mama cried from shame every time the
money arrived.
   One day I saw Mama in the school director’s waiting room. I ran towards
her, but she turned away, and then I understood that she didn’t want me to
see her. I didn’t understand why she had gone to see the director, but I never
asked her about it. A few days later our new director, Tereshchenko, who
had replaced Bessmertny, stopped me in the hall. Short, fat and bald, with a
head that looked like it had been buttered (we called him ‘Butter Head’), he
said: ‘Be sure to tell your dear mother that the school board has granted her
request and you and your brother will be exempted from all school fees. But
don’t forget, this is done only for good pupils. And so, I advise you to
improve your marks.’
   This was the first time in my life I felt humiliated. Back at home I said to
Mama: ‘Dima and I have been exempted from our school fees. Why did
you go to see the director?’
   ‘What else could I do?’ Mama asked in a soft voice. ‘Take the two of you
out of school?’
   ‘I could go out and earn my own money.’
   Then for the first time I saw fear on Mama’s face, almost as if she had
been struck. ‘Don’t be angry,’ Mama said and lowered her head. She was
sitting at the table and sewing. ‘How could I have you go out and work?’
She started to cry. ‘If only you knew how much it hurts me to think of what
he’s done to us, and especially to you! How could he have dared? How
could your father have ever been so foolish? How?’
   For some time now Mama had started to refer to Father as ‘he’ or ‘your
father’. She cried, slumped over an old dress. Scraps of fabric and white
thread lay on the floor around her.
   Mama had sold off almost all our things. The flat was now dank and
empty. A cold, harsh light shone from the windows, through which, down
in the cellar, we saw nothing but shuffling boots and galoshes. The constant
shuffling of dirty feet through the wintry slush was distracting and
unsettling. It seemed as if all these strangers were walking through our flat,
bringing in the cold from the street with them, and considering it
unnecessary to even deign to look at us.
   That winter Mama received a letter from Uncle Kolya that upset her very
much. As we sat at the table later in the evening, each of us busy with some
task by the light of our only lamp, Mama announced that Uncle Kolya was
insisting that I come and live with him for a time in Bryansk, where I would
go to school, and that this was absolutely necessary until Father got a good
job and returned to the family. A frightened Galya looked at Mama. Dima
was silent.
   ‘Your father’s not coming back,’ Mama informed us. ‘He has other
attachments. That’s why he went into debt and left us destitute. And I don’t
want him back. I don’t want to hear anything more about this. Not one
word.’
   Mama, her lips pursed, was silent for a long time.
   ‘Well, that’s that,’ she finally said. ‘It’s not worth talking about. What are
we going to do with Kostik?’
   ‘It’s simple,’ said Dima, not looking at Mama. Dima thought everything
was simple. ‘I’m finishing school this year and will then be off to Moscow
to enrol at the Technological Institute. We’ll sell everything. And then you,
Mama, and Galya will move to Moscow and live with me. We’ll manage.
And Kostik will just go and live with Uncle Kolya for a time.’
   ‘What are you saying?’ Galya said. ‘What sort of life would he have
there? And why should we all be separated?’
   I sat with my head down, feverishly drawing flowers and swirling
scribbles on a piece of paper. For a while now I had taken to drawing
elaborate doodles on some scrap of paper whenever I felt bad.
   ‘Stop drawing!’ said Mama. ‘I don’t understand, why are you smiling?
What do you think about all this?’
   ‘I’m not smiling,’ I mumbled, even though I could feel the awkward
smile on my face. ‘It’s just . . .’
   I fell silent and went on doodling. I couldn’t stop.
   ‘Kostik, darling,’ Mama said in a weak voice, ‘why don’t you say
something?’
   ‘All right,’ I said, ‘I’ll go . . . if I have to . . .’
   ‘That would be best,’ said Dima.
   ‘Yes . . . it’ll be fine . . . of course,’ I said to keep from saying nothing.
   Everything fell to pieces at that moment. I saw nothing but a burning
loneliness before me, and I felt utterly useless. I wanted to tell Mama that
she needn’t send me to Bryansk, that I could give lessons just as well as
Dima, that I could even be of help to her, that it was all so painful for me,
and that I couldn’t stop thinking that they were kicking me out of the
family. But my throat hurt so badly and my jaw was clenched so tightly that
I couldn’t speak, and so I sat there not saying a word. For an instant the idea
struck me of going to be with Father the next day. But the idea had gone as
quickly as it had come, and I was left feeling that I was already completely
alone.
   I eventually pulled myself together and with difficulty managed to say
once again that I was ready – happy even – to go to Bryansk, but my head
hurt now and so I would like to go and lie down. I went to the cold room I
shared with Dima, undressed quickly, lay down, pulled the covers over my
head, clenched my teeth, and did not move the entire night. Mama came
into my room and tried to speak to me, but I pretended to be asleep. She
took my school greatcoat, laid it over me and went out.
   The preparations for my move to Bryansk dragged on until December. It
was hard for me to say goodbye to my school and my friends and to begin
my new and what I assumed would be sad life. I wrote to Father to tell him
I was moving to Bryansk but heard nothing for a long time until just days
before my departure.
   I typically walked through the deserted square behind the Opera House
on my way home from school. I always walked together with my friends
Stanishevsky and Matusevich, who lived in the same direction. One day we
encountered a young woman in the square. She was slight and wore a thick
veil. She passed us, stopped and then turned to watch us. We ran into the
woman the next day at the exact same spot. She came up to us and said to
me: ‘Pardon me, but are you Georgy Maximovich’s son?’
   ‘Yes, I am.’
   ‘I need to speak with you.’
   ‘Certainly,’ I said, blushing.
   Stanishevsky and Matusevich left. They pretended none of this interested
them in the slightest and didn’t even turn round.
   ‘Georgy Maximovich asked me to give you a letter,’ she said in a hurry,
digging around for something in her handbag. ‘You understand he wanted it
to reach you directly . . . Forgive me for telling you this . . . I could not
refuse him. I recognised you at once. You look like your father. Here’s the
letter.’
   She handed me an envelope.
   ‘Are you going away?
   ‘Yes, in a few days.’
   ‘Oh, well . . . it’s a pity. It didn’t have to be this way.’
   ‘You’ll be seeing my father?’
   She didn’t say a word, just nodded.
   ‘Kiss him for me,’ I blurted. ‘He’s very good.’ I had wanted to tell her to
love and care for him, but all that came out were these few words: ‘He’s
very good.’
   ‘Really?’ she said and started to laugh, opening her mouth just enough to
show her small yet very white, glistening teeth. ‘Thank you!’
   She shook my hand and hurried off. The bracelet on her wrist made a
faint jingling sound. To this day I still do not know the woman’s name. I’ve
been unable to discover it. Only Mama knew, but she took the secret with
her to the grave. Her voice, laugh and bracelet reminded me of the woman I
had once seen at Cherpunov’s. Perhaps if it had not been for the heavy veil I
would have recognised her, this butterfly from the island of Borneo. Even
now I am at times disturbed by the notion that this had been the same young
woman who had treated me to cocoa at Kirchheim’s.
   My father’s letter was short. He told me to endure my struggles with
courage and dignity. He wrote:

  Perhaps one day our luck will change and then I can help you. I firmly
  believe that you will grow up to be a true man and will succeed where
  I have failed. Remember this one bit of advice (I always made sure not
  to bore you with too much): never pass a hasty judgement on anyone,
  including me, until you know all the circumstances and until you have
  gained enough experience to understand the things you can’t possibly
  understand now. Be well, write to me, and don’t worry.

   Only Mama and Galya were at the station to see me off. My train left in
the morning. Dima couldn’t miss his classes. He kissed me before he left
for school without saying a word. Mama was cold and kept her hands in her
muff. Galya clung to her. Her eyesight had got much worse in the past year.
She was confused by the crowd and the trains’ whistles frightened her.
Mama made the sign of the cross over me, kissed me with her thin, cold
lips, led me by the arm off to the side, and said: ‘I know that this is hard for
you and you’re angry. But do try to understand that it’s you most of all I
want to spare from our poverty and our troubles. This was the only reason I
insisted that you go to Uncle Kolya.’
   I told her I understood and wasn’t angry. I uttered the right words, but my
heart felt empty and my only wish was for the train to hurry up and leave so
we could end this wretched parting. Mama and I must have already had our
true parting the night she laid my coat across me in bed for the last time.
The train began to move, and I lost sight of Mama and Galya through the
window. The engine’s thick smoke had enveloped the platform and hid
everyone from view. The carriage, filled with winter’s weak light, was as
cold as my heart. The windows let in a piercing draught. The sight of the
snowy plains made me feel worse. A harsh wind blew all night. I was tired
but couldn’t sleep. I stared at the candle in the lamp. The wind bent the
flame down to one side and tried to put it out. I told myself that if the flame
didn’t die then I could still expect some good things to come my way in life.
The candle struggled mightily against the wind and come morning was still
burning. I felt a bit better.
   When I got off at Bryansk in the morning it was so cold that the air rang
with the sound of sleigh runners across the hard snow. The frost clung to the
earth like a thick layer of smoke. The frozen sun gave off a crimson glow. A
sleigh had been sent to meet me. Inside lay a heavy sheepskin coat, a hood
and long mittens. I wrapped myself up, and the horses took off at a gallop.
We rushed along through the glistening, powdery snow – first along a
causeway, then over the ice of the river Desna. The bells on the horses’
harnesses jingled wildly. Far off in the distance up on a hill, the old town,
shaggy with hoar-frost and icicles, sparkled like a child’s tinsel toy.
   The sleigh stopped by a wooden house built on the side of a hill. I
climbed the steps and the door flew open. Aunt Marusya grabbed me by the
arm, pulled me into the dining room, where reflected sunlight danced about
on the ceiling, and insisted I drink half a glass of red wine. My lips were so
cold it hurt to speak. Everything at Uncle Kolya’s was loud and cheerful.
The samovar roared, Mordan barked, Aunt Marusya laughed, sparks shot
with a pop from the stoves. Uncle Kolya soon arrived from the Arsenal. He
kissed me, took me by the shoulders and gave me a playful shake. ‘The
main thing is not to get discouraged! We’re going to do some wonderful
things together.’
   I slowly began to thaw out at Uncle Kolya’s. As always in such
circumstances, my memory pushed aside everything unpleasant. It was as if
my memory had cut out the bad sections in a piece of cloth and sewn
together only the good parts – autumn in Crimea and the cheerful, noisy
Russian winter. I tried not to think about what had recently happened in
Kiev. I preferred to recall Alushta, the three plane trees and Lena. I even
wrote a letter to her in Yalta, but never could bring myself to send it. It
seemed to me very stupid. I tried hard to write something cleverer, but no
matter how much I worked on the letter, it was no better.

                             OceanofPDF.com
21
Artillerymen



The   artillery officers at the Bryansk Arsenal liked to call Uncle Kolya
‘Colonel Vershinin’. Uncle Kolya, with his black beard and lively dark
eyes, actually did look like Vershinin from Chekhov’s Three Sisters, or at
least as we all imagined Vershinin must have looked.
   Just like Vershinin, Uncle Kolya believed in and loved to talk about our
bright future, and he was gentle and full of life. But unlike Vershinin, he
was an excellent metallurgist and the author of many learned articles about
the properties of various metals. He even translated these articles into
French himself – he spoke the language perfectly – and published them in
the Paris Revue de Métallurgie. His articles were also published in Russia,
but not as often as in France. When I arrived in Bryansk, Uncle Kolya was
engrossed in the production of Damascus steel. Uncle Kolya’s lust for life
was remarkable. He seemed to be interested in everything. He subscribed to
every literary journal, played the piano beautifully, knew astronomy and
philosophy, and was a witty and indefatigable conversationalist.
   Bearded Captain Rumyantsev was Uncle Kolya’s most devoted friend.
He looked like Fet, except that he had bright red hair, bad eyes and a kindly
disposition. He always looked uncomfortable and out of place in his
officer’s uniform, and even the Bryansk school-children teased him as the
‘paper soldier’.
   It wasn’t easy to get a good look at Rumyanstev. He was always hidden
behind clouds of tobacco smoke and was so shy he preferred to sit in the
darkest corners of the living room. There he would sit hunched over a
chessboard absorbed in a problem. If he succeeded in solving it, he broke
out in laughter and rubbed his hands.
   Rumyantsev rarely joined in the conversation. He would just sit and
listen, occasionally clearing his throat and screwing up his eyes. But if the
conversation turned to politics – the State Duma, say, or workers’ strikes –
he came alive and expressed the most extreme opinions.
   Rumyantsev was a bachelor. He lived with his three sisters – all of them
petite and each with cropped hair and a pince-nez on her nose. All of them
smoked and wore stiff black skirts and grey blouses to which they affixed a
watch with safety pins in exactly the same spot, as if by mutual agreement.
The sisters were always hiding people at their flat – students, old men in
billowing cloaks and strange women as severe-looking as themselves.
Uncle Kolya warned me never to say a word to anyone about the people
staying at the Rumyantsevs’.
   In addition to Rumyantsev and his sisters, another frequent visitor to
Uncle Kolya’s was Staff Captain Ivanov, a meticulously neat and tidy man
with delicate white hands, an exquisitely trimmed blond beard and a high,
delicate voice. Like most bachelors, Ivanov had to find a home somewhere,
which he did at Uncle Kolya’s. He came by every evening to sit and chat.
Taking off his overcoat and undoing his sword belt in the front hall, he
always blushed and explained that he just happened to be passing by or that
he had some important matter to discuss with Uncle Kolya. But then, of
course, he made himself comfortable and stayed until midnight.
   I was grateful to Ivanov for breaking me of the habit of being ashamed of
doing simple things for myself. Once I ran into him at the market. He was
buying potatoes and cabbages. ‘Would you please help me carry all this to
the droshky?’ he asked me. ‘Pëtr is sick, so I have to do everything myself.’
(Pëtr was his batman.)
   As we were carrying a heavy sack of cabbages to the droshky, we met the
young German teacher from the Bryansk gymnasium. In response to my
bow, she turned up her nose and looked away. I blushed.
   ‘Don’t be embarrassed,’ said Ivanov. ‘You’re not doing anything to be
ashamed of. My way of dealing with people who give me haughty looks is
to stare straight back at them. It’s most effective.’
   We took our seats in the droshky, now piled high with vegetables, and
drove off down Moskovskaya Street, the main thoroughfare. We passed by
many acquaintances. We even passed General Sarandinaki, head of the
Arsenal, riding in a carriage and pair. All of them chuckled upon seeing us
in the droshky with the vegetables, but Ivanov just stared them straight in
the eyes. His gaze made them uncomfortable and they stopped chuckling
and ended up giving us a friendly nod. Sarandinaki stopped his carriage and
offered to send Ivanov his batman, but Ivanov politely declined the offer,
saying that he could manage these simple chores just fine by himself. The
general raised his eyebrows and gave his driver a gentle poke in the back
with his black scabbard, and his grey horses set off at a trot.
   ‘You see how simple it is,’ Ivanov said to me. ‘Never give in to
prejudice.’
   I knew that Ivanov was right, of course, but nevertheless I had hated
having all those mocking eyes directed at me. The bad habit was just too
ingrained in me. I used to catch myself being frightened of not behaving
like everyone else or being embarrassed about our poverty and trying to
hide it from my schoolmates.
   Mama had viewed our change in fortunes as the greatest of tragedies. She
did everything possible to conceal it from her friends. They all knew that
my father had deserted the family, but whenever someone asked, Mama
always said that he had simply gone away for a while on a trip and that
everything at home was just fine. She sat up at night darning and mending
our clothes in the hope people wouldn’t notice any signs of our destitution.
Mama’s courage had forsaken her, and we inherited her timidity.
   As the droshky climbed the hill to Ivanov’s house, cabbages started to
fall out of the sack, rolling and bouncing back down the road to the delight
of a group of boys. The driver stopped. We climbed down and began
gathering up the spilled heads of cabbage. I must have been red in the face
from shame, because Ivanov took one look at me and said, ‘How about I do
it myself. I think it’d be better you just went on home.’
   If before I had been ashamed of picking up cabbages in front of passers-
by, after Ivanov’s words I was so ashamed of myself that tears came to my
eyes. I frantically gathered up the remaining cabbages and managed in
between to cuff the ears of a small boy, the son of the local merchant
Samokhin, who had been dancing about the pavement and shouting:

       The silly schoolboy couldn’t control his baggage
       And now look, just look at all the cabbage!

  Howling and rubbing his eyes, little Samokhin ran home and hid.
  I looked at Ivanov and, judging by his sly expression, felt certain that he
had spilled the cabbages on purpose.
   After that I began to show off. Every morning I went out with a wooden
shovel to clear the snow in front of our house, I split firewood and kept the
stove burning, and far from trying to avoid chores asked to be given as
many as possible. As for little Samokhin, he never stopped yelling at me
from the safety of his fenced yard: ‘Blue beef !’ (All of us boys from the
gymnasium were called ‘blue beef’ because of our blue school caps.) But
Samokhin’s mocking no longer bothered me in the least.
   Ivanov’s lessons in life were reinforced by those I received from
Lieutenant-Colonel Kuzmin-Karavaev, a narrow-chested man with steely
grey eyes. He had founded the first consumers’ cooperative in Bryansk and
opened the town’s first grocery shop on Volkhovskaya Street. He purchased
all the goods and wares himself and then sold them from behind the counter
of his packed little store. This venture of Karavaev caused a commotion
among the merchants of Bryansk. The local head of the Merchants’ Guild
sent letters denouncing him to the Artillery Staff Headquarters in St
Petersburg. The town’s intelligentsia and the workers of the Arsenal,
however, stood firmly behind Karavaev, and the denunciations did no good.
His shop grew and prospered with each passing day.
   We all took turns helping Karavaev in his shop, and he even hired me as
his regular assistant. I spent almost all my free time there, breaking open the
smelly crates of groceries and weighing out salt, f lour and sugar. Protecting
his elegant officer’s uniform beneath a heavy apron like a blacksmith might
wear, Karavaev worked fast, but still managed to joke with his customers
and tell me interesting things about where all the different wares and foods
came from. Karavaev’s shop sold goods from all over the country – tobacco
from Feodosia, wines from Georgia, caviar from Astrakhan, lace from
Vologda, mustard from Sarepta, chintz from Ivanovo-Voznesensk and
glassware from the Maltsov workshops. The shop smelled of herring brine
and soap and, most of all, the heavenly aroma of fresh sacking kept in the
back room.
   In the evening Karavaev locked and bolted the shop door, and we sat
down to a cup of strong tea. While the kettle rattled on the iron stove,
Karavaev would cut the sugar with a flat Japanese bayonet, sending blue
crystal sparks into the air, and I fetched the zhamki – sweet honey cakes –
from a wooden bin.
   Someone always came by the shop to tea – either Ivanov, or the
Rumyantsev sisters, or Aunt Marusya. Ivanov would sit down on an empty
crate and, without bothering to remove his overcoat or even his gloves, try
to prove to Karavaev that Russia had not developed enough to even need
shops like his. Karavaev coughed as if he were being suffocated and did his
best to ignore Ivanov’s arguments. Aunt Marusya always brought her
homemade biscuits and cakes. The Rumyantsev sisters, their pince-nez
flashing, drank tea from their saucers. They called Karavaev ‘Don Quixote’
and said that he was wasting his time with his shop. Russia, they insisted,
didn’t need petty little things like grocery stores, no, what Russia needed
were great upheavals. At this point Ivanov would begin to jingle his spurs
and burst into his rendition of ‘Malbrough s’en va-t-en guerre’. The
Rumyanstev sisters would then call him a reactionary, get up and leave.
   Early in the spring the shop burned down. It had been a crude and
obvious case of arson – the shop door had been smashed in and the goods
doused with paraffin. The whole town knew that the Bryansk merchants had
set the fire, but the investigation dragged on and on and in the end no one
was ever arrested. Karavaev grew thin and haggard, his cough got worse,
but he refused to take it seriously, saying: ‘Finita la commedia! The only
thing that might save our country is some great upheaval. Pull all Russia up
onto its hind legs, then we’ll finally get somewhere.’
   The losses from the fire were considerable. The members of the
cooperative – workers from the Bryansk Arsenal and Karavaev’s fellow
artillery officers – had difficulty covering them. Remarkably, Staff Captain
Ivanov paid for the lion’s share of the losses himself. He was a frugal man
and had managed to save several thousand roubles during his years of
service at the Arsenal. He gave almost all his money to Karavaev.

                                     •

I spent the winter and summer in this friendly family of officers. But the
pain of what had happened back in Kiev never left me. I couldn’t stop
thinking about my mother and father, and at times I felt so ashamed to be
living in this warm and welcoming home where the mood was always
happy and relaxed. I could see before my eyes our cold cellar flat, the
empty table with its few scraps of bread, Mama’s worried expression, and
Dima, exhausted from tutoring. Mama wrote seldom; Galya and Dima not
at all. Sometimes I wondered whether Mama didn’t write because she
couldn’t even afford postage stamps. I had to do something to help her, but I
didn’t know what.
   I could not get used to the Bryansk gymnasium. All the boys in my form
were much older than me. As the days passed, I missed my old school more
and more and tried to find some way to return to Kiev. In the end I wrote a
letter to Suboch, our Latin teacher. I told him everything that had happened
to me and asked whether I might be able to come back. Soon after, I
received an answer.
   ‘With the start of the school year this autumn,’ Suboch wrote, ‘you will
once again be a student of the First Gymnasium, in my form, and will not
be obliged to pay any school fees. To help you support yourself in a modest
but fully independent manner, I can offer you several tutoring jobs. You
won’t be a burden to anyone. Don’t torment yourself over what has been –
tempora mutantur et nos mutamur in illis – we must hope that we change
for the better.’
   I read this businesslike letter and a spasm gripped my throat. I realised
the affection in it and, at the same time, I realised that from this moment on
I alone, relying on no one, was responsible for my life and future.
   The realisation was terrifying, even though I was almost sixteen years
old.

                             OceanofPDF.com
22
Kean, the Great Tragedian



Yellow posters had gone up on the fences around Bryansk announcing the
arrival of the actor Orlenev,1 then on tour.
   The posters had been printed on thin, rough paper. The paste had soaked
right through them, and the goats ripped them off the fences with their teeth
and ate them. They walked about chewing, and one could read the words
Genius . . . Dissipation printed in big black letters on the yellow strips of
paper dangling from their mouths. Only a few of these posters had survived
and on these it could be read that Orlenev would be appearing in Bryansk in
the role of the English tragedian Kean in a play called Kean, or Genius and
Dissipation2. Uncle Kolya bought tickets well in advance. For several days
all we talked about at home was Orlenev.
   The play was being put on at the Summer Theatre in the municipal park.
It was an old wooden structure covered in peeling pink paint. Years’ worth
of posters, drenched by the rain, hung in tattered clumps from the walls.
The theatre had been boarded up for ages. At dusk, bats flew out from
under the eaves and darted about over the deserted back alleys. Young
ladies in white dresses shrieked from fear – there was an old superstition
that bats were drawn to anything white and once they attached themselves
you could do nothing to prise them loose. The abandoned theatre appeared
mysterious. I was certain that in its empty hall and dressing rooms withered
flowers, pots of greasepaint, ribbons and yellowing sheet music lay
scattered about, all left behind from those days when, according to local
lore, a touring company had once passed through and put on an operetta. I
imagined young women with rouged cheeks and blue-shadowed eyes
running over creaking boards from their dressing rooms onto the stage, their
velvet trains trailing behind them. Impudent Lotharios strummed
seductively on their guitars, the cruel words of their romances tearing at the
hearts of the simple townsfolk:
       I dreamed of a day, never to return,
       And of the one who shall never come . . .

   That theatre had seen it all – young Gypsies with heartbreaking voices,
ruined landowners smelling of horse sweat – they’d ride a hundred versts
just to hear some Nina Zagornaya sing – cavalry officers with black
whiskers, merchants in brown bowlers, and trembling young brides in
ruffled pink dresses as fluffy as foam.
   This theatre conjured up for me thoughts of July nights, when lightning
flashed over the tops of the lime trees and the rush of blood to your head
made you giddy. Nights when passing love and unruly passion left neither
fear nor regret and when one would risk everything for nothing more than a
single glance. One glance, to the jingling sound of horse bells and the
whoops of a tipsy coachman. One glance, like lightning in the sultry black
night filled with the scent of the lime tree blossoms and the distant hum of
the Bryansk forest, wild and impenetrable and capable of healing any heart
suffering from melancholy and betrayal. The walls of the theatre held inside
them the echoes of long-silenced voices, the memories of reckless lives,
seductions, duels, muffled sobs and burning hearts.
   The theatre seemed long dead and shrouded in cobwebs and destined
never to be used again. But it was opened up, cleaned and aired. New carpet
was laid in the aisles, and the dust was brushed from the boxes’ velvet
upholstery, after which it went from grey to cherry red. The chandelier up
under the roof was lit. Its old crystals shone, dim and uncertain, but then,
with the first chords of the orchestra, they burst boldly to life and twinkled
with the light of hundreds of multi-coloured stars. Old ushers in white
cotton gloves took their places at the doors. The air was filled with the
smell of perfume, sweets and the freshness of the garden. A murmur arose,
of muffled voices, jingling spurs, creaking chairs, laughter and the rustling
of the little programmes decorated with lyres and oak leaves.
   ‘Orlenev, Orlenev, Orlenev!’ the audience called from every corner of the
theatre.
   Uncle Kolya took his seat in the box, elegantly dressed in his uniform
frock coat with its black velvet collar. Aunt Marusya sat next to him
radiating an ashy brilliance from her new smoke-grey dress, her hair and
her excited grey eyes – this was her first visit to the theatre in a very long
time. Staff Captain Ivanov strode casually down the carpeted aisle, the little
spurs on his pointy-toed boots clinking ever so softly. Even Captain
Rumyantsev combed his thick reddish beard and put on his best coat. He
kept taking his handkerchief out of his back pocket to wipe his flushed face.
The Rumyantsev sisters sat close together in a row, their cheeks blazing.
    My old friends from Rëvny also came – Volodya Rumyantsev and Pavlya
Tennov. Even though there was a seat for him in the box, Volodya went up
to the gallery. He had quarrelled with his sisters. Pavlya sat with his legs
crossed and a condescending look on his face. Having lived a long time in
St Petersburg as a student, he expected little from provincial theatricals.
    Aunt Marusya pulled me towards her, picked a piece of lint off my jacket
collar, took a good look at me and then smoothed my hair. ‘Now, that’s
better.’ I glanced at myself in the tarnished mirror at the back of the box. I
was terribly pale and so thin I looked as if I might snap in two like some
little child.
    The curtain went up. The play began.
    I had seen good actors in Kiev, but this small, sad man with sharp
features was performing a miracle on the stage. With every word and every
expression, he revealed the pain and nobility of the great Kean. When he
cried in his ringing voice, ‘The deer’s been shot!’, all his hopeless despair
and need for mercy erupted in that single exclamation.
    I was trembling by the time the players seated in the audience began
acting out the staged quarrel. I could not hold back my tears when the
curtain fell and the old English stage manager, his eyes red from crying,
came out to the front of the stage to say in a quivering voice that the play
could not continue because ‘the sun of England, the great tragedian Kean,
has lost his mind’.
    Aunt Marusya turned towards me, tapped me on the hand and tried to say
something amusing, but instead screamed with surprise and leapt up out of
her seat. Uncle Kolya also turned towards me and rose to his feet. The
entire hall shook with applause. And then I turned round. Right behind me
stood Father, as tired as ever and with the same sad, affectionate smile, but
with his hair now completely grey. Everything began swimming before my
eyes, and then, suddenly, went blank. Father caught me as I fell.
    I remember poorly or, more accurately, don’t remember at all, what
happened next. I came to on a small sofa at the back of the box. I was lying
down and my collar had been undone. Water was running down my chin,
and Aunt Marusya was spritzing me with eau-de-Cologne. Father lifted me
by the shoulders, sat me up, and kissed me.
   ‘Just sit for a minute, don’t try to move,’ he said. ‘It’ll soon pass. Didn’t
you get my telegram?’
   While an exhausted Orlenev took his bows and collected the bouquets
that had been tossed on stage, Father told me briefly that he had found a job
at the railway factory in Bezhitsa, a small town only eight kilometres from
Bryansk. He had just arrived and, having found no one at home at Uncle
Kolya’s, had come to look for us at the theatre.
   ‘How’s Mama?’ I asked.
   ‘Mama?’ he repeated, as if he hadn’t quite heard. ‘Oh, by the way, I
brought you a letter from her. Mama doesn’t want to live in Bezhitsa. She’s
moving to Moscow with Dima, she thinks for good. She’s taking Galya too,
of course.’
   ‘Did she say anything about me?’
   Father thought for a moment. ‘I don’t think so. I saw her only briefly. She
must have written everything in her letter. Here, read it.’
   He gave me the letter. The audience continued applauding. I read the
letter quickly. It was short and dry.
   Mama wrote that I was to stay with Uncle Kolya until she got settled. For
now, there was nothing she could say to comfort me. She was planning to
move to Moscow next month, in July. She wanted me to spend the summer
in Bryansk, but if I wanted I could go and live with Father in Bezhitsa. Still,
it would be better and easier if I were to stay in Bryansk. She added:
‘Unfortunately, we can’t stop in Bryansk on the way from Kiev to Moscow,
but I’ll send you a telegram on our way through so you can come and see us
at the station and we’ll talk everything over.’
   After I had finished reading the letter, Aunt Marusya laughed and said to
my father: ‘And now, we won’t give him up to anyone, not even to you,
Georgy Maximovich.’
   ‘Not for anything,’ said Uncle Kolya. ‘But don’t worry, Georgy, we’ll
have a little chat about it.’
   ‘Yes, we’ll do that,’ Father agreed.
   We went out into the gardens. The glowing lamps hissed among the trees.
Up on the bandstand, a military band pounded out with all its might a
rousing march as though delighted the play was over and the musicians
could go back to making as much noise as they liked. We climbed into our
carriage. As we made our way down the steep hill, the horses picked their
steps carefully.
   Mama’s letter left me disheartened. Things were no clearer now than they
had been. Obviously, Mama had not taken Father back. I couldn’t
understand why she had written me such a cold letter. Had she already
started to forget me? Did no one at all want me? Father carried on a lively
conversation with Uncle Kolya. But why was he ignoring me? There were
so many troubling things I wanted to tell him. Perhaps if I could have told
him and had a good cry I might have felt better.
   Everyone loved me at Uncle Kolya’s – my uncle, Aunt Marusya, all
Uncle Kolya’s friends, but still I always had this profound pain in my heart.
I had to hide my sorrow so as not to hurt my aunt and uncle’s feelings.
   I remembered Suboch’s words – that soon I could stop being a burden to
anyone. The notion seized me. Everything was suddenly clear. In other
words, I was a burden to everyone. Father had his own life. Who knows,
maybe he was planning on living with someone in Bezhitsa. And Mama?
Why had she accepted my leaving so easily? It must have been because of
Galya. Galya was blind, the doctors could do nothing to help her. This had
driven Mama to despair. She was completely consumed by Galya’s terrible
misfortune. She must have had nothing left in her soul besides her
enormous pity for Galya.
   A dusty moon hung over the town. Its light made the metal roofs look
wet. Aunt Marusya leaned over to me. ‘May I see the letter?’
   I handed it to her. She folded it in half, slipped it into her glove, and then
fastened the mother-of-pearl button over it.
   My head started to ache. The pain was so bad it brought tears to my eyes.
   ‘What’s the matter?’ asked Aunt Marusya.
   ‘I’ve got a terrible headache.’
   ‘You poor thing. It’s all too much at once.’
   At home they put me to bed. I lay there listening to the conversation in
the dining room. I could hear my father’s voice. I kept waiting for him to
come in and wish me goodnight.
   Fresh air from the window made me sleepy. Dozing off, I heard Orlenev
cry out in a tormented voice just outside my room, ‘The deer’s been shot!’
And then, all of a sudden, I heard faint music coming from far off, on the
very edge of the night. It was leaving, drifting off into the distance, and it
seemed as if it nodded farewell to me as it departed.
   Then Aunt Marusya said: ‘He’s a weak boy. It’s all been too much for
him.’
   I asked: ‘For whom?’
   ‘Sleep now,’ said my aunt’s voice. ‘I’ll be right by your side. Pour your
own tea, why don’t you.’ Teaspoons began twirling in their cups, round and
round, faster and faster. They made me giddy, and I began to feel myself
falling. I fell for a long time and as I fell, I forgot everything.
   I lay in bed with a fever and headache for several days. Meanwhile,
Father left for Bezhitsa. As soon as I was well, Uncle Kolya and I left to
visit Father. Bezhitsa was a dull and dreary factory settlement. The ground
was littered with porous slag from the furnaces. The few birch trees were
bent and crooked. Smoke belched from the factory chimney. Father lived in
a crude log house that smelled of coal dust. His room was spartan. He lived
here alone. We found him reading an encyclopedia. He was glad to see us.
   ‘I understand,’ he said to Uncle Kolya. ‘This no place for Kostik. It’s
boring, uncomfortable and lonely. I won’t last long here myself.’
   ‘Well, what are you going to do?’ asked my uncle sternly.
   ‘Go somewhere else. My life just hasn’t worked out, and I don’t even
care anymore. It’s all my own fault.’
   I looked at Father. This was no longer the man I knew from 1905 or
before – at Gorodishche or Gelendzhik, or in Vrubel’s hotel room. It was as
if that had been my real father, and this was some double who had ruined
his life.


1  Pavel Orlenev (1869–1932), famed actor of the stage and early silent
films.
2Alexandre Dumas’s Kean (1836), on the life of the famed English actor
Edmund Kean (1787–1833).

                             OceanofPDF.com
23
On My Own



Finally, the first signs of autumn arrived.
   Behind Uncle Kolya’s house there was an old apple orchard on a steep
hillside. Lichen covered the hollow tree trunks and the rickety fence. I was
one of the few who ever ventured into the orchard. I used to go there with
my notebook, lie down in the grass and write poetry. As I now recall, the
poems were bad, drenched in an indistinct melancholy. Busy ants hurried
across the lines of my notebook, dragging along dead wasps; withered twigs
dropped from the trees. The sky, strangely dense yet transparent, sparkled
above the orchard. The wind swept the clouds from the sky and piled them
up on the far side of the Desna. I tried to count them and got up to two
hundred, but then everything became a blur in my eyes, and I gave up.
   Autumn announced its arrival with a dry leaf falling quite unexpectedly
on a bench and a small green caterpillar lowering itself on a thread onto my
head.
   I was sad to see summer go. Uncle Kolya had spent the summer in
Bryansk, and I often visited him in the Arsenal, either at his laboratory or at
the foundry workshop. I liked to watch the steam hammer at work. Standing
at the hammer Staff Captain Ivanov told me of a celebrated blacksmith from
the Obukhov works who could crack a walnut sitting on top of an upturned
tumbler with a 1½-tonne steam hammer without cracking the glass. I liked
everything about the Arsenal – the low buildings dating back to the time of
Catherine the Great, the courtyards overgrown with weeds and cluttered
with iron castings, the lilac bushes along the workshop walls, the shiny, oily
copper cylinders of old steam engines, the smell of alcohol in the
laboratories, the bearded blacksmiths, the smelters, and the fountain of
bluish artesian water bubbling up from a well by the Arsenal’s outer wall.
   I had to say goodbye to all this, to Bryansk, to Uncle Kolya’s cosy home,
and perhaps for a long time.
   That autumn I was to return to Kiev. This had been decided at a brief
family meeting at the Bryansk railway station when Mama, Galya and
Dima passed through on the way to Moscow. I had gone to the station with
Uncle Kolya and Aunt Marusya to see Mama. Mama looked much older,
and she spoke with Uncle Kolya in an apologetic tone, as if she felt she had
to justify herself in his eyes. Galya was almost completely blind by now.
And her hearing was beginning to go as well. She wore thick, heavy
glasses. When someone spoke to her, she stared hard for a long time trying
to make out who it was and would then reply with strange, irrelevant
answers. Dima was sullen and silent.
   Mama gave me a hug and looked me up and down from head to toe. She
said that I looked much better than I had in Kiev. She sounded offended. I
said that I wanted to return to Kiev and that I’d been readmitted to my old
school. I’d live with Borya and earn my keep by giving lessons. Mama said
that she very much wanted to take me with her to Moscow but that it simply
wasn’t possible. She had no idea how she was going to get on herself, let
alone care for me. The whole time Galya kept saying: ‘Kostik, where are
you? Oh, there you are! I can’t see you at all.’
   Aunt Marusya, talking very fast, said it was madness to allow me to go to
Kiev and that while she perhaps didn’t understand a thing about the matter
and didn’t have the right to stick her nose into our family business,
nevertheless . . . She stopped talking after catching sight of Uncle Kolya’s
disapproving expression. She looked out of the train’s compartment
window at the platform. Her eyes were dark with anger.
   ‘Finally!’ Mama said. ‘Better late than never.’
   Father was walking up the platform. He had just arrived on the workers’
train from Bezhitsa. The black jacket he was wearing was shiny with age.
Father entered the train just as the second whistle blew. We began to say our
goodbyes. Father kissed my mother’s hand and said: ‘Marusya, I’ll take
care of Kostik. I’ll send him enough for his living expenses every month.’
   ‘Let’s hope so!’ said Mama. ‘Try to manage this one little thing – I beg of
you.’
   Dima parted with Father coldly. Galya, like a blind woman, groped for
his face with her hand. Father turned so white it seemed even his eyes lost
all their colour.
   The third whistle blew. We exited the carriage onto the platform. Leaning
out of the window, Mama promised to come and visit me in Kiev in the
winter. The train began to move. Father stood holding his hat and watching
the train’s turning wheels. He didn’t want to go back with us to Uncle
Kolya’s and made some excuse about an urgent job in Bezhitsa that meant
he had to catch the very first train back.
   We rode home in the carriage. Neither Uncle Kolya nor Aunt Marusya
said a word. Aunt Marusya sat nibbling the edge of a small handkerchief
and then finally looked over at Uncle Kolya and said: ‘No, I still don’t
understand. How can they do this?’
   Uncle Kolya stopped her with a frown and a glance in my direction. I felt
ashamed of our family troubles and how they were spoiling not only our
own lives. I dreamed of escaping to Kiev as quickly as possible and of
forgetting these misfortunes. Better to be alone than to live in this tiresome
and confusing mess of mutual pain and suffering.
   I waited for August when I’d be leaving for Kiev. It finally arrived,
together with falling leaves and sullen rains. On the day of my departure the
wind drove a hard rain that lashed the carriages of the Moscow–Kiev line.
Father did not come to see me off, even though he had promised he would.
At the station, Uncle Kolya tried to lighten the mood with banter. Aunt
Marusya slipped an envelope into my coat pocket and said: ‘Read it on the
way.’ When the train began to move, she turned away. Uncle Kolya took
her by the arm and turned her round. She smiled at me, but then turned her
back to the train again.
   The raindrops running down the window made it impossible to see. I
lowered the window and leaned out. Uncle Kolya and Aunt Marusya were
still there on the platform watching the train depart. Steam was settling on
the ground. Far off behind the train I could see a strip of clear sky. There the
sun had come out. I took this as a good omen. I pulled the envelope out of
my pocket. Inside was money and a note:

  Look after yourself. You are heading out now into life all on your own,
  and so don’t forget you have an uncle and an aunt here in the
  provinces. They love you very much and are always ready to help.

                              OceanofPDF.com
24
Diky Lane



Borya was still living in a furnished room at the Progress boarding house
on dirty Zhilyanskaya Street near the station. He greeted me warmly, and as
if he wanted to be my protector.
   ‘Good for you’, he said, ‘for deciding to stand on your own two feet.
Come and live with me for a while, and then we’ll find something better for
you. You won’t want to live here.’
   ‘Why?’
   ‘You’ll see.’
   I saw quite soon. After Borya left for the Polytechnical Institute, a puffy-
looking young man with a face like sauerkraut appeared in his room.
Hanging on him were a dusty student’s jacket and green trousers with
baggy knees. His bulging, empty eyes slowly took in the room, the shelf
laden with food, and me.
   ‘Count Potocki,’ the puffy man introduced himself. ‘Your brother’s
closest friend. Former student at the Polytechnical Institute. Forced to leave
due to an incurable illness.’
   ‘What’s wrong with you?’ I asked sympathetically.
   ‘My illness cannot be described,’ replied Count Potocki as he proceeded
to grab a handful of Borya’s cigarettes from a box on the table. ‘My
suffering is beyond words. Due to my illness Professor Paton failed me in
my exams for three years running. Do you know Paton?’
   ‘No.’
   ‘A savage beast,’ said Count Potocki, taking a whole sausage from the
table, giving it a quick inspection and then slipping it into his pocket. ‘The
foe of every last person seeking success. The only medicine that offers me
any relief is ordinary creosote. My parents are late with my allowance and
so quite understandably I’ve run out of money and can’t go to buy more at
the chemist’s. Any chance you might consider it?’
   ‘Consider what?’ I asked, puzzled.
   ‘All right, all right!’ said Count Potocki with a good-natured smile.
‘Enough fooling around. I had wanted to ask Borya for three roubles but I
missed him. Perhaps you might have a little green one on you?’
   ‘Yes, of course!’ I dived into my pocket and pulled out my money. ‘Three
roubles, you said?’
   ‘Oh, my dear young man!’ exclaimed a disappointed Potocki. ‘If a lout
asks to borrow money, he always asks for more than he needs, but if it’s an
honest fellow, he asks for less. Were I, God forbid, a lout, I would have
asked for twenty roubles. But I’ve asked for only three! You may well ask,
where does the truth lie in this matter? As always, truth lies in the middle.
Twenty minus three makes seventeen. We divide seventeen by two and get
eight and a half. A little bit of rounding and we’re left with ten. Simple and
easy.’
   I held out my hand with the ten roubles. He took them in such a strange
way that I didn’t even notice how they ended up in his hand – they just
seemed to vanish in the air. While we’d been talking the door kept creaking.
But as soon as the money had vanished, the door flew open and a little
woman in a dressing gown raced into the room. With every step her slippers
gave the floor a mighty slap. They were too big for her.
   ‘Why?’ she screamed in a strange voice. ‘Why are you giving money to
this monster? Hand it over!’ she hissed, grabbing Count Potocki by his
jacket.
   She tore the sleeve clean off. The count escaped and raced into the hall,
the woman close behind, her heels firing like pistols.
   ‘Hand it over!’ she cried. ‘If only three roubles! Or just two!’
   But the count was too fast for her, and he slid down the stairs out into the
street and was gone. The woman in the dressing gown slumped against the
wall and began to sob in an unnatural, unpleasant sort of way. Lodgers
began poking their heads out of every door. This allowed me to see them all
at once. A pimply youth fixing a pink celluloid collar to his purple shirt
stepped out.
   ‘Madame Humenyuk,’ he instructed, ‘take measures!’
   The proprietress of the Progress boarding house, Madame Humenyuk, a
stout woman with tender, languid eyes, appeared in the hall. She
approached the woman in the dressing gown and said to her in a clear and
wicked voice: ‘March! Back to your room! Stop this ruckus or I’ll call the
police, upon my word of honour as a woman!’
   The woman quietly returned to her room. The hallway hummed for quite
some time with chatter about the affair of Count Potocki. When Borya
arrived I told him everything. He commented that I had got off cheaply and
told me to be more careful in the future. Count Potocki was no count and no
former student, but a law clerk who’d been fired for drunkenness.
   ‘They’re afraid of me,’ Borya remarked, ‘but given your character you’d
be wise to steer clear of them. This place is full of riff-raff.’
   ‘Why do you live here then?’
   ‘I’m used to it. And they know not to bother me.’
   A month later Borya found me a room with full board at the home of old
Pani Kozlovskaya, an acquaintance of Mother’s in Diky Lane. I received
some money from my father and reckoned that even if he didn’t send me
any more I had enough for three months before I’d need to start giving
lessons.
   No one lived in the flat with Pani Kozlovskaya other than her son,
Romuald, a lieutenant in the infantry. The flat was cramped, the floors
sticky from cheap paint. The windows looked out onto a barren garden in
which all but two or three trees had been chopped down. In the winter they
flooded it to make a small skating rink. Fir saplings were sunk into the
snowbanks around the edge of the ice. They quickly turned yellow. It was a
cheap rink, used only by the little boys from Glubochitsa and Lvovskaya
Streets. It didn’t even have a band, just a gramophone with a giant purple
horn.
   Diky – ‘wild’, that is – Lane truly was wild. It led nowhere, petering out
into wasteland buried under snowdrifts and piles of ash that emitted greyish
wisps of smoke. This land always smelled of something burning. I
decorated my closet of a room with portraits of Byron, Lermontov and
Hugo. In the evenings I’d light the kitchen lamp, which fell only on the
desk and the portrait of Hugo. The bearded writer sat, sadly resting his head
on a hand extending from a round starched cuff, and gazed at me, as if to
say: ‘Well, young man, now what are you going to do?’ I was enthralled at
the time with Hugo’s Les Misérables. More than the story of the novel
itself, I loved especially old Hugo’s furious excursions into history.
   I managed to read a great deal that winter. I simply could not get used to
my loneliness, and books helped me to escape it. I frequently recalled our
life on Nikolsko-Botanicheskaya Street, Lena, the cheerful artillerymen,
fireworks in the old park at Rëvny, Bryansk. I had always been surrounded
by lots of interesting and kind people. Now I felt nothing but a humanless
void. The lamp hissed strangely, and this sound intensified my loneliness.
   But a month passed, then another, and I experienced a change. I began to
notice that the worse reality appeared, the more fully I could find all the
good that was hidden inside it. I was beginning to realise that in life the
good and the bad lie side by side. The good can often shine through a fog of
lies, poverty and suffering, just as at the end of some rainy days the fire of
the setting sun can pierce the grey clouds with its rays. I tried to find signs
of the good everywhere. And, of course, I often did find them. They might
shine unexpectedly, like Cinderella’s glass slipper peeping from under the
tattered, grey hem of her dress or like the attentive, tender gaze of her eyes
meeting mine in some street. ‘’Tis I,’ this gaze said, ‘did you truly not
recognise me? Now I’m a pauper covered in rags, but all I need to do is take
them off and I’ll become a princess. Life is full of the unexpected. Believe
me. Don’t be afraid.’
   Such muddled notions filled my head that winter. I was just starting out
on the road before me but was certain I already knew where it would lead. I
was struck by some lines of Fet that appeared to capture what lay ahead:
‘Out of the realm of blizzards, ice and snow, how fresh and pure your
month of May springs forth.’
   I would read these lines aloud. Pani Kozlovskaya listened from the other
side of the wall. Lieutenant Romuald always returned late or sometimes not
at all. Pani Kozlovskaya was lonely and so glad of the sound of any human
voice.

                              OceanofPDF.com
25
Autumn Battles



Back at school both the teachers and my schoolmates gave me as warm a
welcome as I had received from Borya. Even Father Tregubov expressed
some fitting words about the return of the prodigal son. Suboch cross-
examined me about my living arrangements and promised to set me up with
lessons within the month. Inspector Bodyansky emitted the terrifying snort
that he used to frighten the swarm and said: ‘Guilty, but with extenuating
circumstances. Off to class with you but stay out of trouble!’
   Somehow I still managed to get into trouble again.
   Every form in our school was divided into two sections. The first was
considered ‘aristocratic’, the other ‘democratic’. Those in the first section
were mainly blockheads – the sons of generals, wealthy landowners,
prominent officials and financiers. In our second section were the sons of
the intelligentsia, middle-class types, Jews and Poles. The division was
clearly deliberate and ordained from above.
   The hostility between the first and second sections was constant and
expressed itself in mutual disdain. Every autumn a battle was traditionally
fought between the two sections involving every boy except for the
swarmers and those in the top form. These were already considered adults,
almost university students, and so brawling seemed by now beneath them. It
was only once in a great while that the battles did not take place.
   The date of the battle changed every year, which we did to throw off the
watchful school authorities. Nevertheless, they somehow managed to guess
when the big day was approaching and then they began to worry and resort
to all manner of tricks to try to avert the bloody clash: without warning they
would dismiss the entire form suspected of instigating the brawl
immediately after the first period of the day, or they would send two or
three forms at the same time on a trip to the local art gallery, or they
suddenly locked all the doors to the garden, our favourite place for the fight.
But none of their cunning ploys worked. The battle always occurred on the
appointed day and always during the midday break.
   Some of the boys were ‘exempted’ from the fighting. Namely, the sick,
the weak and those who couldn’t stomach the day-to-day pushing and
shoving, let alone organised violence. Exemptions were freely granted, and
no one was made to feel bad about it. I was one of those boys exempted for
that last reason. We were required to remove our uniform sashes to signal
our neutral status. According to the iron rules of school warfare, no one was
permitted to touch a boy without a sash. Nevertheless, we preferred not to
even venture out into the garden, but to watch the battle from inside. You
could see it better from the classroom windows.
   A sudden deadly silence marked the beginning of the battle. In the blink
of an eye, the corridors emptied as the schoolboys raced to the garden. Then
came a menacing, muffled roar. Upon hearing this, Inspector Bodyansky
turned white and crossed himself. Through the clouds of dust raised by the
attacking formations, volleys of chestnuts whistled like grapeshot. All the
proctors – Kazimir, Maxim (a.k.a. ‘Cold Water’) and a few others – tore
into the garden, a jostling crowd of terrified supervisors right behind them.
Doors slammed. The corridors echoed with the agitated voices of teachers.
   Throwing on his coat and pulling his cockaded hat down tight on his
head, Inspector Bodyansky ran down the stairs as he hurried to the
battlefield. Once Father Olendsky, the Catholic priest, came racing after
Bodyansky into the garden. We climbed up onto the windowsills. We
wanted to see Olendsky raise his crucifix aloft and appeal to the warring
sides to lay down their weapons. But instead, Olendsky rolled up the
sleeves of his cassock and then began to pull the combatants apart and fling
them left and right. He did this with amazing dexterity and ease, literally
tossing the boys aside as if they were balls. No doubt Olendsky was reliving
his childhood. Huffing and puffing, the good father returned to the teachers’
common room. His shining red face left no doubt that participating in this
battle, even if only as a peacemaker, had given him enormous satisfaction.
   As soon as the fighting erupted, the proctors and supervisors threw open
all the doors to the garden. It was one of their cunning military tactics. By
opening the doors, they could then divide the boys into small groups and
drive them back into the school.
   ‘It’s begun at the First Gymnasium!’ the street boys yelled.
   From the windows it was difficult to tell just what had begun and what
was happening. Dirt flew, branches shook. There came shouts and dull
thuds, as if two herds of elephants were trampling each other. Then, at long
last, obliterating all else and resounding through the long corridors, there
arose the cry of victory that swelled in a tumultuous, roaring crescendo.
This meant that the second section had won, and the first had been forced to
beat a hasty retreat. As best I recall, the first section never won.
   Almost always in the front rank of the victors was a boy with a pert snub
nose – the future writer Mikhail Bulgakov. He rushed into battle where the
fighting was at its most dangerous. Victory followed him, crowning him
with a golden wreath of his own dishevelled hair. The blockheads from the
first section were afraid of Bulgakov and tried to slander him. After one
battle they began a rumour that Bulgakov had violated the established rules
of combat by using his metal belt buckle as a knuckle-duster. No one
believed this lie, however, not even Inspector Bodyansky.
   I myself took part in this particular battle because I had a score to settle
with a boy by the name of Khavin, the son of a broker on the Kiev stock
exchange. He was tall and gangly and loved to use the word ‘sacramental’
in practically every sentence even though he sounded ridiculous given his
pronounced burr. On his trips to the theatre, he would blow languid kisses
to the girls. He rode to school in his own carriage and pair and had nothing
but contempt for us plebeians.
   The cause of the affair was Pani Kozlovskaya. The old lady could barely
see and was afraid to go out. I escorted her to church almost every Sunday.
She felt badly about causing me so much trouble and, blushing like a young
girl, was forever apologising. I usually led her by the arm to keep her from
bumping into the other pedestrians. Lieutenant Romuald took my place on
occasion, but only rarely. I suspected he was ashamed of his aged mother,
of her old-fashioned clothes, her helplessness. At any rate, most Sundays
the lieutenant was ‘devilishly busy’. On one of those Sunday mornings I
was accompanying Pani Kozlovskaya to church along Mikhailovskaya
Street. We came face to face with Khavin. Raising an eyebrow, he gave me
a look of scornful amazement. Next, Khavin slowly looked Pani
Kozlovskaya up and down, after which he grinned, snapped his fingers,
whistled and walked on.
   When the battle began, I rushed to the garden. Khavin was standing off to
the side. He was not wearing a sash, and neither was I. Both of us had been
‘exempted’. Nevertheless I walked straight up to Khavin and slapped him in
the face. He let out a strange squeak. Supervisor Dolt grabbed me by the
arm. The next day Inspector Bodyansky summoned me.
   ‘What is all this?’ he asked. ‘I might understand had you been fighting
according to the established rules just like the rest of you wild animals, but
to go and slap someone out of the blue! Whatever for?’
   ‘I had my reasons, Pavel Petrovich. You know I’ve never fought before
in my life.’
   ‘Yes, yes, quite true! But now you risk having to pay school fees in the
second half of the year. Why did you hit him?’
   I dug in my heals and didn’t want to say anything more. ‘It was worth it.
You may or may not believe me, Pavel Petrovich, but that’s all I’m going to
tell you.’
   ‘Fine, I believe you,’ said Bodyansky. ‘Now go! May this all simply be
forgotten.’
   After every battle Bodyansky and the director had to have unpleasant
conversations with the school board and the parents of the beaten
blockheads.
   ‘This is all the result of your having no respect for authority,’ Bodyansky
would tell us angrily after these conversations. ‘You’ve been reading too
much Ibsen and Leonid Andreev,1 that’s the problem! Enlightened youth!
Future pillars of society! Ha! Savages and troglodytes, that’s what you are!’


1Leonid Andreev (1871–1919), writer and playwright known for his dark
pessimism.

                             OceanofPDF.com
26
‘Living’ Languages



The only ‘dead’ language we learned at school was Latin. This was our
main subject. It was taught by our form master, Vladimir Fadeevich
Suboch, who looked like a tall, thin tomcat with long, spiky whiskers. He
was a kind man and we liked him, even though he would spring devastating
Latin tests on us without warning. Bodyansky also paid close attention to
our progress in Latin and repeatedly said: ‘Latin is the greatest phenomenon
in the history of world languages!’
    Greek was not obligatory. Only a few of the boys took it. It was taught by
an old Czech covered in tobacco ash by the name of Pospíšil, which to us
Russian speakers sounded like ‘Mr Hurry’. He shuffled slowly down the
corridors on his weak puffy legs and was always late for class. And so
instead of ‘Mr Hurry’, we called him ‘Opozdal’, ‘Mr Late’.
    Of the ‘living’ languages, we learned French and German. These were
boring lessons. The Frenchman, Serremout, who had a withered arm and a
little reddish beard from the era of King Henry IV,1 always carried under his
arm several large oleographs that he liked to hang on the wall.
    The oleographs depicted the contented rural life of villagers from some
unknown country during the various seasons of the year. In spring men in
straw hats decorated with brightly coloured ribbons ploughed the earth,
while their wives, rouged and dressed in tight laced bodices, fed yellow
chickens. In summer the men mowed and danced around the haystacks,
waving branches of dog-rose. In autumn they threshed grain in front of
cottages that resembled children’s toys, while in winter they skated on a
frozen river, apparently for lack of anything better to do. Nevertheless,
these pictures of villagers were much more interesting than others that
depicted boring geometrical rooms devoid of furniture but featuring a cat
playing with a ball of wool.
   Serremout hung up the oleographs, took a pointer with his good arm,
drew our attention to the villagers dancing with their scythes or to the cat,
and asked in his thunderous voice: ‘What do we see in this interesting
picture?’
   We answered all together in French that in this interesting picture we
clearly see braves paysans or a tiny kitten playing with a nice old lady’s
ball of wool. This business with the pictures dragged on for two years until
one day the inspector replaced Serremout with a new teacher, Monsieur
Gobas.
   Monsieur Gobas had just arrived in Russia, and he didn’t know a word of
the language. Ours was the first lesson he gave in this enigmatic country.
Monsieur Gobas was from Brittany. He was a short, round little man, so
indifferent to life that he could not even be bothered to get angry with us.
   The inspector introduced us to Monsieur Gobas and left. Then Régamé, a
French boy in our class, stood up and in exquisite Parisian dialect
respectfully informed Monsieur Gobas that in Russia it was customary to
say a prayer before every lesson. Monsieur Gobas smiled politely,
apparently accepting this as one of those native eccentricities which every
country possesses.
   Littauer got up next. He was a Jew but knew the Russian Orthodox
liturgy quite well. He went over and stood before the icon, crossed himself
with a flourish, and began the ‘Prayer before Studies’: ‘O Gracious Lord,
we pray to thee, send us the blessing of thy Holy Spirit, enriching and
strengthening the power of our souls.’ He recited this prayer five times,
then he recited the Great Litany. Following that, Littauer proceeded to the
Creed, the Lord’s Prayer and the prayer of St Ephraim Sirin. Monsieur
Gobas stood there politely, his head bowed and looking puzzled.
   ‘O Lord, Master of my life,’ intoned Littauer, ‘deliver us from sloth,
despondency, ambition and idle chatter!’
   We repeated his words in unison, keeping an eye on the clock. Only ten
minutes of class time remained. We worried that Littauer’s knowledge of
the liturgy might run out before the ten minutes were up. But Littauer didn’t
let us down. He recited the Creed a second time and then ended the lesson
by singing: ‘O Lord, save thy people.’
   The bell rang, and Monsieur Gobas shrugged faintly and left for the
teachers’ common room. A ray of sun glinted off his black frock coat as it
sailed away down the hall. We broke out laughing behind the cover of the
raised lids of our desks, but in no time Inspector Bodyansky stormed in,
panting: ‘Tomfoolery! Blasphemy! How dare you, you bunch of louts! Who
organised this little prayer service? Was it you, Littauer?’
   ‘What? Me?’ exclaimed Littauer, getting to his feet. ‘But I’m a Jew,
Pavel Petrovich.’
   ‘Oi-oi-oi!’ said Bodyansky. ‘A Jew! An interesting line of reasoning. Am
I to believe that if you made the sign of the cross your arm would fall off ?
Gather up your books and go home. Along the way you might ponder the
sad fact that this is your second failing mark in conduct.’
   With Monsieur Gobas we plunged into the jungle of irregular verbs and
conjugations. The noble French language became a tangled labyrinth of
rules. We lost our way in the thickets of all those mysterious accents –
l’accent aigu, l’accent grave, l’accent circonflexe. Gradually we began to
think of the living language of Flaubert and Hugo as something distinct and
separate from what Monsieur Gobas was teaching us.
   With each passing year we loved French literature that much more and
worked ever harder to read it in the original. We began to study the
language on our own or hired private tutors, having lost all hope in this
phlegmatic Breton. Yet he kept on conjugating and declining mindlessly as
he stared out of the window at the falling Russian snow. His eyes gave
away nothing except a longing to be alone by a warm fireplace. We asked
him about Balzac and Dumas, about Hugo and Daudet, but he pretended not
to hear or told us that these were writers for adults and not Russian
schoolboys who still didn’t know the difference between le futur and le
conditionnel.
   In time we learned that Monsieur Gobas had a small stone house in a
Breton village where his old mother bred rabbits and he had come to Russia
solely to earn a bit of money in a few years’ time and then retire and return
home to his mother and grow mushrooms that he would be able to sell for a
considerable profit in Paris. This explained why he had no interest in Russia
or French literature.
   Only once did Monsieur Gobas have a talk with us from the heart. It was
a spring day. He was preparing to leave, to spend the summer holidays in
Brittany. This explained his relaxed mood. He joked in a morose way how
man had been created for a quiet life. For this reason, one must always
follow the rules and be content with little. He then told us how as a boy he
had caught lobsters with his grandfather. He sighed and fell silent as if lost
in thought. Through the window we could see the chestnut trees in full
bloom. The soft, fresh air of spring filled the corridors and caressed our
faces. A sad Monsieur Gobas looked out of the window and shook his head
– life had cast him out into an alien world like a ladybird blown by a strong
wind from a green leaf. And all because he was poor, and this dreary labour
was the only way he could scrape together enough to guarantee a peaceful
old age.
   ‘Well,’ he said, ‘that’s life! We mustn’t curse and moan. Patience is its
own reward. Isn’t that so?’
   No one said anything because at that time we were convinced that
patience was the same thing as stupidity.

                                      •

Many years later I told my friend the writer Arkady Gaidar2 how Serremout
had taught us French with his oleographs. Gaidar was delighted because
that was how he had learned French. Memories came back to him, and for
several days in a row he talked to me of nothing but Serremout’s teaching
method. We were living at the time near Ryazan and enjoyed going for long
walks and fishing in the nearby lakes.
   ‘What do we see in this picture?’ he would ask in French and then, before
I could say a word, answer himself: ‘We see an unwelcoming village and
two poor travellers shaking its dust from their boots. We see the villagers
who refuse to exchange with the travellers three eggs for a handful of
tobacco.’
   On the train back to Moscow somewhere along the little-travelled line
between Tuma and Vladimir, Gaidar woke me in the middle of the night
and asked: ‘What do we see in this interesting picture?’
   I couldn’t see a thing because the flickering candle in the lamp was
sending long shadows up and down the carriage.
   ‘We see,’ Gaidar explained, ‘a railway thief pinching a pair of warm felt
boots known in Russia as “valenki” from the basket of a nice old lady.’
   With these words, Gaidar – a good-natured giant of a man – jumped
down from the upper berth, grabbed a nimble fellow in a checked cap by
the collar, took the valenki from him, and said: ‘Get lost! And you’d better
hope I never lay eyes on you again!’
  The frightened thief ran to the door and jumped from the moving train.
This was, I’m certain, the only practical application ever of Monsieur
Serremout’s method.

                                        •

Our German lessons were more interesting, and not because Oskar
Fëdorovich Johanson was a model teacher, but because sometimes we got
to occupy ourselves with matters far removed from the German language.
Most of all this involved Oskar Fëdorovich asking us to make copies of his
operatic score ‘The Spirit of Tokay Wine’.
   Johanson was a nervous old Viennese. He came to class with a sawn-off
leg from a wooden chair. When the noise in the class became unbearable,
Johanson grabbed the chair leg and banged it on his desk with all his might.
Order was restored immediately. Johanson was a knowledgeable music
lover. He had planned to become a composer, but some obscure chapter in
his life had destroyed his dream and so, with disgust, he turned to teaching.
His demands of us were minimal. If one of us failed an exam, Johanson
would stare at the boy for a long time over his pince-nez, sigh, and then
slowly write down the lowest possible passing mark in his book.
   Once, when I was in the sixth form, Johanson left his opera score on the
tram. It was his only copy. He put an advertisement in the local newspaper,
but no one returned the score. Johanson stayed away from school for a
whole week and when he returned, we hardly recognised him – he was grey
in the face and had a torn scarf wrapped around his yellow neck. The
silence in the classroom that day was deathly.
   ‘Well, young men,’ he began, ‘it’s all over! That opera was my whole
life’s work. Writing it kept me young. With every page I could feel the
clock move back in time. Yes, it’s true! It was the music of happiness.
That’s what I was writing about. And where is it, this happiness, you ask?
It’s all around us! It’s in the wind in the trees. In the oak leaves, in the smell
of wine barrels. In the songs of the birds, in women’s voices. It’s here, there
and everywhere. I dreamed of becoming a wandering musician, not a man
forced to wear this teacher’s uniform. I envied the Gypsies. I wished to
perform at village weddings and in a woodsman’s cottage. For lovers and
the lonely, for heroes and poets, for those who have been lied to but still not
lost their faith in human goodness. All this was in my opera. Everything! I
thought I could die a contented man having seen it performed on the stage
of the Vienna Opera. Perhaps, I thought, my friend, the old poet Altenberg,
would come, take his seat in one of the velvet chairs, looking like a big
teddy bear, and tears would pour from his eyes.3 For me this would have
been the greatest reward. And perhaps my music would even be heard by
her, she who had never believed in my talents . . .’
   Johanson beheld his thin fingers as he spoke. He seemed intoxicated with
grief. He always spoke in a flowery, theatrical sort of way, but now we
didn’t notice. We just sat there, our eyes staring at the floor.
   During the break Suboch came to speak to us. ‘I wanted to warn you’, he
said as we gathered around him, ‘to be particularly considerate towards
Oskar Fëdorovich. Although I expect you already knew this yourselves.’
   That same day the call went out to every form in our gymnasium: ‘Find
the opera! Find it no matter what!’ I don’t know who issued the call. It
reached everyone by word of mouth. We broke into groups to discuss our
search plans like a bunch of conspirators. We seethed with impatience to get
started.
   The hunt began. We questioned all the tram conductors, we visited the
markets. We searched the shopkeepers’ stacks of wrapping paper. Finally,
the score was found at the Lukyanovsky Market. A boy from the eighth
form had discovered it. A market woman had tried to use the sheets to wrap
lard, but her customers complained that the ink smeared all over the lard
and so she had to find some other paper. Thanks to this, only three pages
were missing. The boys in the eighth form returned the manuscript to
Johanson, and so we did not get to witness it. We only saw how he walked
down the corridor after class surrounded by the older boys. He was not
wearing his pince-nez. He was stumbling and swaying from side to side.
The boys were supporting him. Inspector Bodyansky was standing in the
doorway to the teachers’ common room, smiling and nodding. He folded
Johanson into his arms and they kissed.
   Several days of music madness followed in our school. Johanson brought
in his opera score and fresh music paper. He handed the paper out to us, and
we sat down and made several copies of the opera for him.
   This was in late winter, and in the spring I received in the mail a formal
invitation stating that Oskar Fëdorovich Johanson requested ‘the honour of
my presence’ at the performance of selections from his opera, which was to
take place at the home of one of my classmates. I arrived on the appointed
evening at my friend’s house on Bibikovsky Boulevard. The formal
staircase was brightly lit, and the two large drawing rooms were crowded
with guests. Most of them were boys from our school, but there were girls
from the Mariinskaya Gymnasium as well, along with some grey-haired
musicians and actors. Johanson had yet to arrive. I stood by the entrance to
the main room and looked down the staircase. Suddenly, Oskar Fëdorovich
appeared. He bolted up the stairs looking slim and youthful in his elegant
black frock coat. He strode into the drawing room. Everyone applauded.
   The music, performed by a string quartet and piano, began all at once. It
truly was music of happiness or rather of the joys and sorrows of lovers,
worthy of Tristan and Isolde. I am incapable of conveying the beauty and
melodic power of his music. After the concert most of the guests
congratulated Johanson and left, while those of us who remained were
invited to dinner. Late that night we accompanied Johanson home. He
stopped along the way at the telegraph office to send a cable to Vienna. He
came out looking a bit sad and said that he had waited too long for this
happy day to come. And when you wait too long for happiness, it somehow
turns into a kind of sorrow.


1   Henry IV of France (1553–1610), reigned 1589–1610.
2 Arkady Golikov (pen name Gaidar) (1904–41), writer chiefly of children’s
stories.
3   Peter Altenberg (1859–1919), influential Viennese writer and poet.

                               OceanofPDF.com
27
‘Gentlemen Schoolboys’



Who      could have known what was to become of us ‘gentlemen
schoolboys’, as Bodyansky called us? What would we youths in our faded
caps, always ready for any sort of prank, joke or fight, make of our lives?
What, for example, would come of Bulgakov? No one could have known.
   Bulgakov was older than me, but I remember well his extraordinary
vitality, his ruthless tongue feared by all, and his aura of determination and
strength – we felt it in everything he did and said, however trifling.
Bulgakov loved tall tales and practical jokes, he loved pulling your leg. He
managed to take our tired school life and transform it into a strange world
filled with incredible people and events. Any colourless character, such as
Supervisor Dolt, once caught up in the circle of Bulgakov’s playful
inventiveness, would grow to become something much larger along the
lines of a Sobakevich or a Tartarin de Tarascon.1 He began to lead a
mysterious double life, nothing like the Dolt we knew with his bulbous
alcoholic nose, but the hero of absurd and monstrous happenings. With his
fictions Bulgakov displaced that real, recognisable world around us and
shifted it ever so slightly over the edge into the realm of the
phantasmagorical.
   After leaving school I didn’t see Bulgakov again until 1924 when he was
already an established writer. His connection to Kiev had remained. In his
play The Days of the Turbins I recognised our school’s vestibule and
Proctor Maxim ‘Cold Water’, that honest and boring old man. I could
practically hear the autumn wind rustling our Kiev chestnut trees in the
theatre’s wings.
   I went to school with several boys who later became well-known writers,
actors and playwrights. Kiev has always had a passion for the theatre. Was
it an accident that over a short time our school produced so many people
who found their way to literature and theatre? I don’t think so. (When we
were ‘accidentally’ late to class, Suboch would say to us that there was
nothing accidental in life other than death. After uttering this statement,
Suboch would give the latecomers the lowest possible passing mark in
comportment.) Of course, this was no accident. The reasons for this fact
were so many and so difficult to easily discern that we, given our laziness,
didn’t want to go to the trouble of looking deeply into matters and preferred
to think that it all happened due to some happy coincidence.
   We forget those teachers who inculcated in us a love of culture, we forget
Kiev’s magnificent theatres, we forget that each and every one of us was
enthralled by philosophy and poetry, and we forget that during our youth
Chekhov and Tolstoy, Serov and Levitan, Scriabin and Komissarzhevskaya
were all still alive.2
   We forget the revolution of 1905, the student meetings we boys sneaked
off to, the adults’ arguments we overheard, and we forget that Kiev had
always had its own revolutionary fervour. We forget how we inhaled
Plekhanov, Chernyshevsky3 and all those revolutionary pamphlets printed
on cheap grey paper bearing slogans like ‘Proletarians of the World, Unite!’
and ‘Land and Freedom.’ We read Herzen and Kropotkin, The Communist
Manifesto and the novels of the revolutionary Kravchinsky.4 Disorderly
though it was, this reading bore its fruits.
   We forget the famous Idzikovskaya Library on Kreshchatik, the
symphony concerts, Kiev’s parks, the bright and crisp autumn days, the
noble solemnity of Latin which accompanied us throughout our school
years. We forget the Dnieper, the mild foggy winters, and rich, gentle
Ukraine which embraced the city with its fields of buckwheat, its thatched
roofs and beehives.
   It is difficult to say exactly how these many various things influenced us
in our youth, but they did. They imposed a distinctive poetic structure on
our thoughts and feelings.
   We immersed ourselves in reading. Our understanding of Russian
literature, with all its classical clarity and depth, came to us later than that
of the West. We were young, and Western literature attracted us with its
elegance, its calm and its perfection of design. The cool transparency of
Mérimée was easier for us than the torments of Dostoevsky. Mérimée, like
Flaubert, was as clear as a summer morning, whereas Dostoevsky
descended like a thunderstorm and made us run for cover. We found that
same freedom from doubt in Dickens, in Hugo and Balzac. It’s possible that
the ‘Universal Library’ was responsible for our passion for Western
literature. Those cheap little yellow books flooded the bookshops. For
twenty kopecks you could read anything from Mont Oriol and Eugénie
Grandet, to The Wild Duck or The Charterhouse of Parma. We tore through
them all.
   For a while we were especially carried away by French poetry – Verlaine,
Leconte de Lisle and Théophile Gauthier. We read them in the original and
in translation. Their French, at times almost as elusive as some distant
scent, at others as hard as steel, cast a magical spell over us. We loved this
poetry not only for its melody and vague mistiness, as light as the haze on a
spring day, but also since it evoked in us an image of the poets themselves,
and of Paris. This poetry was but one of many enchanting things about
Paris. Slate roofs, broad boulevards, rain, streetlights, the Pantheon, a rose-
coloured night sky over the Seine, and, finally, poetry. Out of such things
did we construct our naïve impression of Paris, and it was as inconceivable
without poetry as it was without barricades and kisses.
   It was not long, however, before this poetry paled for me beside the rich
gold mine of the Russian poetic tradition –

       The forest sheds its crimson dress,
       The frost casts silver upon the withered field . . .

  We grew, and gradually Russian literature, perhaps the greatest in the
world, possessed our hearts and relegated the literature of the West to a less
prominent though still honoured place.

                                       •

We are also passionate about painting. There hung in the Assembly Hall a
marble plaque of honour with the names engraved in gold lettering of those
graduates who had earned some distinction or become famous. Among
them was the painter Ge.5 We disliked old Ge for his gloomy style and
moralising tone. At the time a delayed vogue for Impressionism was taking
hold.
   My classmate Emma Shmukler was preparing to become an artist. He
studied painting under the Kiev impressionist Manievich.6 I loved
Manievich’s paintings – village huts and gardens, painted in bold strokes,
almost as if he worked with a palette knife.
   I often visited Shmukler. Theirs was, as we used to say, an artistic home.
His father was a well-known physician who often treated patients for free.
In his youth he had dreams of becoming an opera singer, but for some
reason this did not work out. Nevertheless, opera remained his life’s great
passion. Everything in their house spoke of the opera – not only the doctor
himself, a heavy-set, clean-shaven man with a booming voice, but the grand
piano, the handwritten scores on the stand, the jardinières awaiting floral
tributes, the portraits of celebrated singers, and the mother-of-pearl opera
glasses. Even the constant noise in the house spoke of the opera. The
shouting, the heated arguments – all of it sounded like roulades and
recitatives, duets and trios that began at moderato and then swelled from
allegro to forte in clashing arias for male, female and children’s voices.
There was a distinct melody hidden among all the noise. The Shmuklers’
voices had a clear, free ring to them like bel canto, and they carried out of
the flat, echoing through the hall and cascading down the front staircase.
   Although I visited their home often, I preferred the small rented room of
another classmate, the Pole Fitsovsky. Like me, he lived alone. A stocky
boy with a lock of chestnut hair falling down his forehead, he was
imperturbable and regarded everything as a pointless fuss. He had a number
of eccentricities which upset the teachers. For example, he had a habit of
always talking to Stanishevsky, a happy-go-lucky boy who sat next to him,
in pure Russian but in such a way no one could understand a word he was
saying. The reason was quite simple. Fitsovsky spoke extremely fast and
always accented the wrong syllable in every word.
   Fitsovsky forced me to learn Esperanto. This language, invented by the
Warsaw oculist Zamenhof, had a single merit – it was easy. Many
newspapers were published in Esperanto in various countries. What I found
interesting in these newspapers were the lists of addresses for people who
wished to correspond with others in Esperanto. Inspired by Fitsovsky’s
example, I began corresponding with a few Esperantists in Britain, France,
Canada and even Uruguay. I sent them picture postcards of Kiev and in
return received cards with views of Glasgow, Edinburgh, Paris, Montevideo
and Quebec. Gradually, I recommended we expand the nature of our
correspondence and asked them to send me portraits of writers and
illustrated magazines. And so, I received a splendid portrait of Byron from
a young English doctor in Manchester and one of Hugo from a young
Frenchwoman in Orléans. She was very curious and asked me all sorts of
questions – was it true that Russian priests wore vestments made of gold
thread and that Russian military officers all spoke French?
   We gathered for a little party at Fitsovsky’s every week. We didn’t drink
much (we only had enough money for a single bottle of brandy), but still we
put on airs of being Lermontov’s hussars – we read poetry, we argued, we
gave speeches, we sang. We stayed up until the early hours of the morning,
and when the first rays of dawn began to filter through the smoke-filled
room, they struck us as the beginning of a remarkable new life waiting for
us just outside the door. The best were in springtime when the clear
morning air rang with the songs of the birds and our heads were filled with
romantic tales.

                                      •

This remarkable life waiting for us just outside the door was inextricably
connected to the theatre.
   That year we were all taken with Russian drama and the actress
Polevitskaya,7 who played the parts of Liza in A Nest of Gentlefolk and
Nastasya in The Idiot. We could go to the theatre only with Inspector
Bodyansky’s written permission. He allowed us only one chit per week. So
we started making forgeries. I got so good at faking Bodyansky’s signature
that even he couldn’t tell the forgeries from the real ones when they were
confiscated and presented to him by the supervisors. He would yell: ‘I
ought to lock you all up! Theatre, theatre, nothing but the theatre! You
should be hunched over your Latin texts, not hanging out in the gallery! A
bunch of forgers, all of you! You dishonour your well-respected parents!’
   We waited for Polevitskaya after the play outside the stage door. Out she
came – tall and bright-eyed. She smiled at us and got into her sleigh. The
horses shook, rattling their bells. The sound followed them down
Nikolaevskaya Street as they disappeared in the snowy depths of the night.
   Each of us, our cheeks ablaze, hurried off our separate ways in the
heavily falling snow. We slipped on the pavement as we went, bubbling
over with a happiness that kept us from falling asleep once home in our
beds. It flickered on the walls of my room from the light of the street lamp.
It piled up in mounds of snow on the ground. It sang to me all night through
my warm sleep with its eternal song of love and sorrow. Sleighs whistled by
beneath my window. I heard the heavy gallop of horses through the snow.
Who was in such a hurry so late at night? In Lieutenant Romuald’s room a
guitar string sounded by itself. Its hum died away slowly, becoming first a
silver hair, next a silver cobweb. Then it was silent.
   And so I passed that winter, in a state of joyful excitement, the days all a
blur. Reality and poetry had become so entwined I could not tell one from
the other. I lived then all on my own, surviving on the little I made giving
lessons. I had just enough money for food and a few books, but perhaps
since I was young, life was never frightening or a burden.


1 Mikhail Semënovich Sobakevich, an ursine, unsentimental landowner in
Gogol’s Dead Souls; Tartarin de Tarascon, the naïve and slightly ridiculous
hero of Alphonse Daudet’s eponymous novel (1872).
2 Valentin Serov (1865–1911) and Isaak Levitan (1860–1900), painters;
Alexander Scriabin (1872–1915), composer; Vera Komissarzhevskaya
(1864–1910), actress.
3 Georgy Plekhanov (1856–1918) and Nikolai Chernyshevsky (1828–89),
radical Russian thinkers and writers.
4 Alexander Herzen (1812–70), Pëtr Kropotkin (1842–1921) and Sergei
Stepnyak-Kravchinsky (1851–95), also radical Russian thinkers and writers.
5 Nikolai Ge (1831–94), realist painter known for his works on religious
and historical themes.
6 Abraham Manievich (1881–1942), Jewish artist born in Ukraine, later
emigrated to the United States.
7 Yelena Polevitskaya (1881–1973), actress of stage and screen in Russia
and Europe, spent time in the Gulag in the early 1940s.

                              OceanofPDF.com
28
The Hook-Nosed King



Whenever any important person visited Kiev, they were always brought to
see our school. It was one of the oldest in Russia. The authorities were
proud not only of the gymnasium’s history but its magnificent (and
uncomfortable) building as well. The most remarkable feature of the
building was its white marble Assembly Hall with windows at both ends.
The hall was always cold, even in summer. We liked having important
visitors because they always asked the director to give us a day or two off
from classes to mark the occasion. The director thanked them for the
honour shown the school and always agreed to the request. We hurriedly
bound up our books with our belts and headed for the front door in wild
packs.
   But not every visit by some high dignitary went smoothly. Sometimes
there was trouble. Once it involved King Peter I of Serbia. We knew he had
ascended the throne following a bloody palace coup.
   A week before his visit Platon Fëdorovich began teaching us the Serbian
national anthem – ‘God of Justice, Thou who saved us when in deepest
bondage cast’ – and instructed us to greet the king with the Serbian ‘Zhivio’
and not the Russian ‘Hurrah’. Director Tereshchenko (‘Butterhead’) was to
say a few words of welcome in French to the king. Monsieur Gobas wrote
the text. He was extremely proud of this. It was the first time in his life he
had been asked to write a welcoming speech to a crowned head.
   The director memorised the speech, just as we schoolboys would have
done. But Butterhead had a bad memory. He was afraid he would forget the
words when the time came to welcome King Peter. The worried director
ordered the school’s new inspector, Varsonofy Nikolaevich (Bodyansky had
by then been appointed to the Third Gymnasium), to provide him with the
best prompter from among the boys. We didn’t like Butterhead and refused
to say who was the best. Let Butterhead manage on his own. The school’s
best prompter, Régamé, was in our form. We all had listened quietly to the
inspector’s request, polite smiles on our faces. Eventually, we gave in. We
agreed to provide the best prompter, but only if Borimovich, a quiet,
harmless boy, who had been given an unjustly low mark in mathematics,
received a better one. Our instructor Ivanov promised to make the change.
   With an agreement reached, Régamé was given the text and then
prepared a crib. It began with the usual ‘Sire, permettez-nous . . .’
Translated into Russian it sounded rather strange: ‘Sir, permit us to
welcome you within the grey-haired walls of our illustrious school.’ We
learned these words by heart, and whenever the director passed by our
classroom, we repeated them in his squeaky voice. We especially loved
those ‘grey-haired walls’. Butterhead pretended that he hadn’t heard us.
   The school had been scrubbed and polished to a festive sheen in
preparation for the king’s visit. A red runner was laid upon the main
staircase. Even though it was a sunny day, the chandeliers were lit in the
Assembly Hall. We arrived in our dress uniforms and were lined up in two
rows in the vestibule. Suboch stood alongside us. The gold hilt of his small
parade sword peeped out of the top of his pocket. He smelled of eau-de-
Cologne. He had polished his pince-nez so thoroughly they glinted like
diamonds. Butterhead stood by one of the marble columns. In the jargon of
us schoolboys, he had ‘blown a gasket’. He was as white as a sheet and the
medals on his tight coat shook from nerves.
   We heard the honour guard stationed on the street shout hurrah. The cries
of the soldiers kept getting louder as the king approached. A band struck up.
The doors flew open. A despondent Butterhead looked over at Régamé and
hurried to welcome the king.
   The king, a small, hook-nosed man with a grey moustache wearing a blue
uniform with silver braiding, strutted into the vestibule. Behind him was a
large wave of blue uniforms and the shimmer of black top hats. The porter
Vasily, a former circus wrestler, was supposed to help the king off with his
coat. But he became all confused, and instead of relieving the king of his
coat, tried to force him back into it, at which point the king, his face
flushed, resisted and then managed to break free of Vasily’s enormous
paws. An adjutant sprang forward, brushed Vasily aside with a white-
gloved hand, and obligingly removed the royal coat. Vasily stood panting at
attention, unable to understand what had just happened. His eyes glazed as
though he were drunk.
   ‘Sire!’ said Butterhead, bowing before the king and waving his left hand
in a frantic motion behind his back. This was the signal that he had
forgotten his speech.
   Régamé began to ‘serve up’ the prepared text. He did it masterfully.
   The king looked with displeasure at the director’s bald red head. He was
still panting after the struggle with Vasily. Then he overheard Régamé’s
prompting and grinned. The director somehow managed to get through his
welcoming remarks and, pointing to the narrow path between the long rows
of us schoolboys in our blue uniforms, invited the king into the Assembly
Hall. The king began to move, followed by the crush of his suite, the
officers’ swords clattering wildly over the vestibule’s metal floor as they
went. The flash of their epaulettes blinded our eyes. Walking a step behind
the king was General Ivanov, the bellicose commander of the Kiev district.
Next came the Serbian ministers holding their top hats and dispensing
sugary smiles.
   We had put our little plot together well in advance. As soon as the king
began to make his way between us boys, we shouted in one friendly voice,
‘Zhulë!’ It sounded almost the same as the Serbian ‘Zhivio’, but, in Russian,
meant ‘bunch of scoundrels’. We repeated our salute a few times and it
reverberated down the ‘grey-haired walls’ of our school.
   Not suspecting a thing, the king walked slowly on, clanking his spurs,
nodding and smiling at us as he went. Suboch blanched. General Ivanov
made a fist at us behind his back. The white kid glove in his hand shook
with fury. A horrified Butterhead stumbled, caught himself and then minced
along after the king.
   After the king had passed, we heard the school choir up in the balcony
greet him with the Serbian national anthem, their voices solemn and pious.
Suboch stared us up and down. We stood quietly to attention, however, and
our faces showed nothing but the tender emotions befitting such a solemn
occasion. Suboch shrugged his shoulders and looked away.
   But we were not quite done with the king. As he passed us on the way
out, we shouted just as welcomingly and deafeningly as before: ‘Derzhi
yevo!’ – ‘Grab him!’ Again, it sounded almost like ‘Zhivio!’ and again the
king didn’t notice a thing. He just smiled graciously, and his ministers,
cradling their top hats lined with white silk, filed elegantly past us towards
the door. It was only when the grey- bearded and supposedly liberal Serbian
prime minister, Nikola Pašić, approached that we correctly and clearly
shouted: ‘Zhivio Pašić!’
   We had, of course, overdone it. We had charged Matusevich, a boy with
powerful bass voice (he went on to sing for the Kiev Opera), to bellow
‘Grab him!’ directly into the king’s ear. And he did. The blast almost
knocked the king over, but he quickly recovered and then gave Matusevich
a polite nod.
   After the incident twelve of us got a dressing down from the director and
were rusticated for three days. The authorities wanted to cover up the
scandal in the hope it would just go away, and so our punishment was
extremely light. To this day I still don’t understand why they even bothered.
For me, those three days were filled with nothing but relaxation, reading,
walks along the Dnieper and outings to the theatre. Not surprisingly, word
of the scandal with the Serbian king leaked out. We became the envy not
only of the rest of our school, but of every school in the city, none of which
was ever honoured by a royal visit.

                             OceanofPDF.com
29
Wasting Time



To this day I am suspicious of people with round, black eyes. My pupil
Marusya Kazanskaya had eyes like that. They looked like little olives.
   Her eyes stared blankly upon the world and only came alive with
curiosity when some dashing cadet or student from the lycée in his coat
with a beaver collar passed by her window. The mere sight of such a fine
young man was enough for the knowledge Marusya had worked so hard to
learn – dates, geography, the rules of syntax – to immediately fly out of her
head. I had been hired to tutor Marusya, a twittering girl with a pointy nose
and beady eyes. Suboch found me the job. ‘They’re a very respectable
family,’ he had told me, ‘but I’ll warn you the girl is no genius.’
   The very respectable family consisted of Marusya, her father – a retired
general – and her skinny French mother. The general was no bigger than a
dwarf. He was so short in fact he couldn’t reach the hook to hang up his
own coat. He did, however, boast a luxuriant beard. The general was an
extremely clean and tidy man with puffy hands and watery eyes that flashed
with anger when he recalled his enemies – all those generals who had been
promoted ahead of him, men such as Sukhomlinov, Dragomirov,
Kuropatkin and Rennenkampf.1 Kazansky had retired with the rank of
adjutant general after commanding a number of military districts and giving
lessons in strategy to the heir to the throne. ‘As for military strategy,’
Kazansky would say of his pupil, the future Nicholas II, ‘that young man
was a complete dunderhead.’ He considered Alexander III to have been the
last true tsar.
   Kazansky had a large library of books on warfare, but I never once saw
him remove a single one of them from behind the locked shelves. Rather, he
spent his days reading the New Times or playing patience. Curled up on his
lap lay a small Pomeranian with little black eyes just like Marusya’s. The
dog was mean and stupid.
   After every lesson Kazansky would accompany me as far as the Galitsky
Market. He loved these daily walks and came alive as soon as we left the
house. He would laugh and joke and tell me stories of army life. He liked to
poke his walking stick into the stomachs of the soldiers and cadets who
stopped to salute him, saying: ‘I’m tired of this sort of thing, soldier!
You’ve all got fat. Suck in that belly of yours!’
   Madame Kazanskaya and her husband had ridiculous pet names for each
other. I have met many boring people, but no one as boring as her. Blinking
away tears from her wet, lap-dog eyes, she spent her days sewing pinafores
for Marusya or painting purple irises on pink satin ribbons. She gave the
ribbons as birthday presents to her acquaintances. No one knew what they
were for. They had no discernible use. Some people hung them on the wall
or laid them out on drawing room tables. Others tried to use them as
bookmarks, but they were too big and wide and didn’t fit somehow. The
more discriminating of her acquaintances stuffed them somewhere out of
sight. But Madame Kazanskaya just kept on painting these ribbons with
idiotic persistence and giving them to the same people, over and over.
Ribbons filled their flat. They were everywhere and you couldn’t avoid
them no matter what. It was enough to drive one mad.
   The Kazanskys’ flat had high ceilings and tall windows, but the light
inside seemed cold and grey. The sun’s rays somehow lost their warmth and
sparkle as they passed through the glass and just lay on the floors like faded
sheets of paper.
   At first I could not make sense of the Kazanskys’ view of life. They
believed in God, and they believed that this God had constructed the world
in such a way that it would benefit the Kazanskys. God, in their
understanding, was some sort of tsarist governor general, albeit on a much
larger scale, of course. He kept order in the universe and looked after
respectable families. Along with God, the Kazanskys had another divinity,
Marusya, and they showered her with the morbid love of parents who have
children late in life. Her whims were not just charming; they were sacred.
At the mere sight of her pouting lower lip, the general immediately
removed his spurs and tiptoed about the flat, sighing, and her mama quaked
and rushed off to the kitchen to prepare Marusya’s favourite meringue
treats.
   The old couple’s main topic of conversation was arranging Marusya’s
marriage. The search for a husband was done carefully, step by step, and
with time grew into an obsession. Madame Kazanskaya’s memory became a
thick, heavy ledger in which the name, and worth, of every eligible bachelor
in Kiev and the entire south-western territory of the Russian Empire was
recorded.
   Marusya attended Madame Duchinskaya’s private gymnasium. The
school was not attended by the daughters of noblemen, but social hierarchy
was still paramount, and marks were given according to the wealth and
social standing of each girl’s parents. Marusya, however, was so stupid that
even Papa Kazansky’s high rank could not save her from receiving the
lowest marks. Every time she was called to the blackboard, she just stood
there sullenly, pressing her lips together and picking at the trim of her black
pinafore.
   Each failing mark caused a commotion in the general’s household.
Marusya locked herself in her room and declared a hunger strike. Madame
Kazanskaya was convulsed with sobs. The general ran from one end of the
flat to the other, screaming that he was going to go and see the governor the
very next day and insist that this ‘Jewish nest’ of a school be shut down.
   The following morning the general donned his parade uniform and all his
medals and left to have it out with the school’s headmistress, Madame
Duchinskaya, a majestic lady who understood well the position and power
of her pupils’ parents. In the end, Marusya was given the lowest passing
mark. Duchinskaya did not want to lose the daughter of a such an exalted
family, for this might cast a shadow on her irreproachable institution. With
this, the Kazansky family calmed down, until the next failed examination.
   After my first session with Marusya I became convinced that trying to
explain things to her was utterly pointless. She couldn’t understand a thing.
And so, I opted for a risky approach. I made her memorise her textbooks.
This she somehow managed. She learned page after page by heart just as
children memorise counting rhymes like ‘Ten fat sausages, sizzling in a
pan, one went pop and the other went bang! Eight fat sausages . . .’ I could
have used the same method to teach history, geography and Russian to a
parrot. It was hellish work. I found it exhausting. But soon I was rewarded
for my efforts: Marusya brought home a passing mark in one of her
examinations.
   That evening when I rang the bell to the Kazanskys’ flat, the general
himself opened the door. He had a spring in his step and was rubbing his
hands. Around his neck hung the Order of St Vladimir. He helped me off
with my old school coat. Marusya, in a new dress, her hair done up with
enormous bows, was waltzing with a chair for a partner in the drawing
room. She was accompanied by Mademoiselle Martin, her French
instructor, on the piano. The Pomeranian ran from room to room, barking
incessantly. The door to the dining room flew open and out walked Madame
Kazanskaya wearing a dress with a long train. I could see behind her back
that the table had been laid for an elaborate celebration. An exquisite dinner
had been planned to acknowledge the occasion of Marusya’s first decent
mark.
    At the end of the meal, the general nonchalantly popped the cork on a
bottle of champagne. Madame Kazanskaya kept a close watch to make
certain he didn’t spill any on the tablecloth. The general began gulping the
champagne as if it were water. In an instant, his face turned red. He started
flapping his arms wildly. His shiny round cufflinks came loose and went
flying across the room.
    ‘Yes, sir!’ the general said, shaking his head despondently. ‘Every man
has his cross to bear in this hell of life. And carry it we do! Life’s no bed of
roses for us. Women, my dear fellow, simply don’t understand us. They’ve
got the brains of a chicken.’
    ‘My little dove,’ said a frightened Madame Kazanskaya, ‘I don’t
understand a word you’re saying.’
    ‘To hell with it!’ the general said with conviction. ‘Let me say it again:
To hell with it! Let’s drink, my friend. As our great poet said: “Oh, what a
lot, Creator, to be the father of a grown-up daughter!”’2
    ‘My little dove, how can you!’ cried Madame Kazanskaya, causing the
little bluish bags under her eyes to tremble.
    ‘Oh, my sweet muffin,’ said the general in a sugary yet threatening voice.
‘You would be wise to remember that I am an Adjutant General in the
Imperial Russian Army.’ He slammed a fist on the table and bellowed, his
voice cracking: ‘Listen when I’m talking to you! I have had the honour of
giving instruction to His Imperial Majesty the Tsar and I don’t care to hear
any comments from mindless fools like you! Attention!’
    After this outburst, he calmed down a bit, and then leapt from his chair,
grabbed a napkin, tapped with his heels, and started dancing about the
room. This didn’t last long before he collapsed into an armchair and had to
be revived with spirits of valerian. He sat there moaning, his little legs
twitching.
   Mademoiselle Martin and I left the party together. The street lamps were
barely visible. It was a foggy March evening.
   ‘Oh, I’m exhausted!’ said Mademoiselle Martin. ‘I can’t teach that stupid
girl any longer or even go back to that house of fools. I refuse.’
   I was envious of her. She could choose not to give lessons to Marusya
while I couldn’t: the Kazanskys were paying me thirty roubles a month.
This was an unheard-of sum for a tutor. It was at this time that Father
unexpectedly quit his job at the Bryansk factory and left Bezhitsa for my
grandfather’s home at Gorodishche. He could help me no more. I lied to
Mama. I wrote to her that I was earning fifty roubles a month and didn’t
need any help. Not that she had anything to give me.
   Mademoiselle Martin and I parted at the corner of Bezakovskaya Street.
It was snowing heavily. An incandescent light buzzed over the entrance of a
chemist’s shop. She walked off in the direction of Bibikovsky Boulevard,
making swift, gliding steps over the slippery pavement as if she were on
roller skates. Her head was lowered, and she was shielding her face from
the snow with her muff.
   I stood and watched her go. I felt strange after the champagne. I had
moments when my head felt foggy and it seemed to me as if I were on the
verge of some miraculous new beginning, but just as quickly the fog would
clear and I understood with complete clarity that nothing had changed.
Tomorrow, just like today, I would walk these same streets so well known
to me now and would pass by the same old front gardens, droshky drivers,
advertisements and policemen, and would make my way to the home of the
Kazanskys. I would climb the yellow-tiled stairs, would ring at the doors
painted to look like oak, would hear the Pomeranian begin to bark, and
would then be allowed back into the now-familiar entryway with its mirror
and coat stand, upon which I would see hanging on its usual hook the
general’s greatcoat with its red lapels and all its buttons done up from top to
bottom.
   Then that same fog came back, and I thought of the kinship among lonely
people like Mademoiselle Martin, Fitsovsky and myself. It seemed to me
that we ought to be friends and help each other get through life. But what
made me think Mademoiselle Martin was lonely? I didn’t even know her. I
had heard she was from Grenoble and could see that she had dark and
slightly sullen eyes, but that was all.
   I stood there on the corner for a while and then went to see Fitsovsky. He
wasn’t at home. I found the key in its usual hiding place and opened the
door.
   The room was cold. I lit the lamp, kindled the fire in the iron stove,
picked up a book of poetry from the table, lay down on the oilskin sofa and
covered myself with my coat. I opened the book, and once again that same
fog rolled over me. ‘The autumn days descend in slow succession,’3 I read.
A warm light appeared between the lines on the page. It began to grow and
spread, and I could feel its heat on my face.

       A yellow leaf twists slowly to the ground,
       The air is marvellously pure, and transparent the freshness of the
         day,
       Yet my soul cannot escape its invisible decay.

   I put the book aside. I lay there thinking about the future before me that
would be filled with many remarkable moments, some happy, some sad.
The future was like this night, with the soft gleam of the snowdrifts, the
silence of the gardens, the glow of the street lamps. The night hid in its
darkness those good people who would one day become dear to me and that
gentle dawn that was destined to break over the earth. The night hid all the
mysteries, all the encounters, all the joys of the life to come, and I found it
wonderful.
   No, we young people were not unhappy. We believed and we loved. We
did not bury our talent in the ground. Our souls were not in danger of
‘invisible decay’. No. We were ready to struggle to the death for our
wonderful future. That is what I thought as I lay on that oilskin sofa. To hell
with all those loathsome Kazanskys and their kind, to hell with that whole
anthill of cruel respectability.
   When I returned home to Diky Lane from Fitsovsky’s, Pani Kozlovskaya
handed me a telegram. It said that my father was dying on the farm at
Gorodishche. The next morning, I left Kiev for Belaya Tserkov. My father’s
death broke a thread binding me to my family. It was the first one. Soon the
remaining threads began to break as well.
1 Generals Vladimir Sukhomlinov (1848–1926), Vladimir Dragomirov
(1862–1928), Alexei Kuropatkin (q.v.) and Paul von Rennenkampf (1854–
1918).
2 Famous line spoken by Pavel Famusov in Alexander Griboedov’s Woe
from Wit (1823).
3   Opening lines of ‘Autumn Elegy’ (1900) by Alexander Blok (1880–1921).

                             OceanofPDF.com
30
The Inn on the Braginka



The old steamer was slowly paddling its way up the Dnieper. It was late at
night. I couldn’t get to sleep in the stuffy cabin and went out on deck. Out
of the invisible darkness the wind was blowing, carrying raindrops with it.
An old man in a patched coat was standing by the captain’s bridge. The dim
light of a lantern illuminated his bristly face.
   ‘Captain,’ the old man said, ‘couldn’t you do an aged man a favour and
let me off on the shore here? It’s less than a verst from here to my village.’
   ‘What, are you joking?’ the captain asked. ‘I can’t see my hand in front
of my face, but you want me to head into shore and smash up my boat for
you?’
   ‘But I’m not joking,’ he replied. ‘My village is just there over the hill.’
He pointed into the darkness. ‘Let me off ! Be so kind!’
   Pretending not to have heard the old man, the captain asked the
helmsman: ‘Terenty, can you see anything?’
   ‘I can’t even see my own arm,’ the helmsman growled sullenly. ‘This
damned darkness! I’m steering by sound.’
   ‘We’ll damage the boat,’ the captain said.
   ‘Nothing’ll happen to your old tub!’ the man muttered angrily. ‘Call
yourself a captain? You ought to be selling pears in Loevo and not taking
boats up the Dnieper! Well, are you gonna drop me off or not?’
   ‘I’ve already told you!’
   ‘And I’m telling you!’ the old man answered, peevishly. ‘Who’s ever
heard of passengers being ferried all the way to Teremtsy without
stopping?’
   ‘Now listen,’ the captain shouted, ‘I can’t see a thing! Where am I going
to land? Where?’
   ‘Right here, across from the steep bank!’ Once more he pointed out into
the pitch-black darkness. ‘Right here! Let me stand next to the helmsman
and I’ll show him.’
   ‘Know what?’ the captain said. ‘Why don’t you just go to hell?’
   ‘Aha!’ the old man cried with a note of victory. ‘So you refuse? Is that
so? You refuse?’
   ‘Yes! I refuse!’
   ‘So, in other words, it means nothing to you that I’m hurrying to my
daughter’s wedding? You couldn’t care less. You’re tormenting an old
man!’
   ‘What’s your daughter to me?’
   Suddenly, the old man lowered his voice. ‘But what about Andrei Gon?’
he asked menacingly. ‘You’ve not yet had the opportunity to meet Andrei
Gon? Well, you ought to know that Andrei Gon himself will be at the
wedding.’
   The captain was silent.
   ‘Lost your tongue, have you?’ the old man asked in a nasty tone. ‘Your
old tub is called Hope. Well, you’ll have no hope of getting home safely if
you don’t let me ashore. Gon does good turns for me. He’s my brother-in-
law. Gon won’t forget this.’
   ‘Stop threatening me!’ muttered the captain.
   ‘Sidor Petrovich,’ said the helmsman in a hoarse voice, ‘you can see
what a stubborn old man he is. Let’s let him ashore. It’s not worth getting
mixed up with Gon.’
   ‘Oh, fine, whatever!’ said the captain to the old man. ‘Go and stand by
the helmsman and show him the way. But make sure you don’t wreck the
boat.’
   ‘Good heavens! I know the Dnieper like the back of my hand! And I’m
fully aware that the boat is government property!’
   The old man went over to the wheel and began to give commands.
‘Down hard with your right hand! Harder or you’ll miss it! That’s it. Now
again, harder!’
   Willow branches began to lash the sides of the boat. The boat scraped
against the bottom and then came to a stop. On the covered deck below, the
passengers, jolted awake by the thud, began to make a noise. A sailor shone
a lantern from the bow. The steamer sat in the flooded underbrush. It was
about thirty paces to shore. Black water rushed among the bushes.
   ‘Well,’ the captain said to the old man, ‘out you climb. We’ve arrived.’
   ‘How can I get out here?’ the old man said, full of surprise. ‘It’s over my
head. I could drown!’
   ‘What’s that to me? You asked for it yourself. Well?!’ shouted the
captain. ‘Hurry up and jump or I’ll order the crew to toss you into the
water!’
   ‘An interesting business this!’ muttered the old man before making his
way to the bow.
   He crossed himself, climbed over the railing, and jumped into the water.
The water came up to his neck. Unleashing a torrent of curses, he
floundered noisily towards the shore. The steamer slowly backed out of the
thickets.
   ‘Well, still alive?’ shouted the captain.
   ‘Stop your barking! What do you think?’ the old man answered from the
shore. ‘Just the same, you can count on a meeting with Andrei Gon.’
   The steamer moved on up the river.
   Elusive gangs of bandits had been roaming about Chernigov province
and all of Polesia that summer. They raided isolated manors and farmsteads,
robbed the mail and attacked the trains. The fastest and most daring of the
atamans was Andrei Gon. Time and again units of dragoons and frontier
guards surrounded him in the woods, drove him into the impassable
marshes of Polesia, but every time Andrei Gon escaped to freedom, the
flames of the fires he set behind him lighting his way through the dark
night. Legends had already grown up around him. People said that Andrei
Gon was a defender of the poor, the wretched and the orphaned, that he
only attacked the manors of the nobles, that he himself was either a
Chernigov student or a village blacksmith. His name became a symbol of
popular vengeance. I was travelling that summer to those very places lorded
over by Andrei Gon, to my distant relations by the name of Sevryuk. They
had a small, modest estate called Iolcha in Polesia. Borya had arranged the
trip. I didn’t know the Sevryuk family at all.
   ‘You’ll enjoy a nice rest at Iolcha,’ he had said. ‘The Sevryuks are a bit
odd, but very simple. They’ll be happy to see you.’
   I agreed to go to Iolcha because I had no other choice. I had moved on
into the eighth form at the gymnasium. Having just passed my
examinations, I was facing a long boring summer in Kiev. Uncle Kolya had
left for Kislovodsk with Aunt Marusya. Mama had stayed in Moscow. And
I didn’t want to go to Gorodishche because I could tell from Uncle Ilko’s
letters that things were not going well between him and Aunt Dozia. Family
quarrels frightened me. I didn’t want to see any more or be forced to play a
part in them.
   It was the evening of the second day of my journey when the steamer
pulled alongside the low banks of the Dnieper. Clouds of mosquitoes
whined overhead. The purple sun was sinking into the pale steam over the
river. Cold came out of the underbrush. A fire was burning. Around it stood
a few sinewy saddle horses.
   The Sevryuks were waiting for me on the shore: a thin man in boots and
a silk jacket, the owner of the manor; a short, young woman, his wife; and a
student, her brother. They settled me into a cart, and then the Sevryuks
jumped onto their horses and, with a yell, set off at a swinging trot. They
quickly vanished from sight, and I was left alone with the taciturn driver. I
hopped down from the cart and walked along the sandy road. Tall grass
protruded out of the dark swamp water along the roadside. The faint
reflection of the setting sun in the water refused to die. Ducks flew
overhead, beating their heavy wings in steady rhythm. Fog crawled out of
the undergrowth before settling like soft grey rags over the ground.
Suddenly, a hundred frogs began to croak, and the cart clattered over a span
of wooden planks. The manor, enclosed by a palisade, came into view. It
was a strange, octagonal house with many verandahs and extensions,
standing in a clearing in the forest.
   That evening, as we sat eating a simple supper, a stooped old man in
flimsy leather shoes and a cap with its peak torn off walked into the dining
room. He took a long hunting rifle from his shoulder and leaned it against
the wall. A black-and-white pointer followed him in, its nails clacking
against the floorboards, sat and began to bang the floor with its tail. The
banging was so loud, the old man said: ‘Quiet, Halas! Behave yourself !’
   Halas stopped banging his tail, yawned and lay down.
   ‘Well, Trofim, what news?’ asked Sevryuk, and, turning to me, said:
‘This is our forester, our inspector.’
   ‘What news?’ Trofim sighed, taking a seat at the table. ‘All of the same
sort. They’ve burned down the manor at Lyady, and at Staraya Guta they
beat Pan Kaputsinsky to death, God rest his soul. He was a wicked old
scoundrel, truth be told, but still . . . Nothing but murder and plunder all
around, but you alone they seem to spare. It’s most peculiar! Why does he
leave you in peace, that Andrei Gon? Nobody knows. Perhaps he’s heard
you get on well with the peasants. Or maybe he just hasn’t got around to
you yet.’
   Marina Pavlovna, Sevryuk’s wife, laughed. ‘He’s always going on like
that, Trofim is,’ she said. ‘Always amazed that we’re still alive.’
   ‘And may you live a long and healthy life,’ said Trofim. ‘I’ve nothing
against it. Have you heard about the blind man’s guide?’
   ‘No, what about him?’ asked Marina Pavlovna excitedly.
   ‘What indeed! They’re burying him tomorrow at Pagonnoe. You ought to
go.’
   ‘We certainly will,’ said Marina Pavlovna.
   ‘For that God will forgive you many a sin,’ Trofim sighed. ‘You might
take me with you. I don’t have the strength to walk there on my own.’
   Trofim looked out of the window and asked in a low voice: ‘Are we all
alone?’
   ‘Just our own people,’ replied Sevryuk. ‘Speak.’
   ‘Well, all right,’ Trofim began mysteriously. ‘The Masters are holding a
meeting at Leizer’s inn on the Braginka.’
   ‘Who?’ the student asked.
   ‘The Masters, you know, the Old Men of Mogilëv.’
   ‘Hold on a minute, Trofim,’ said Sevryuk. ‘Let me explain it to them.
They don’t know anything about the Old Men of Mogilëv.’
   It was then I heard for the first time the strange tale of the Old Men of
Mogilëv. The story carried me back in time, a century or more, perhaps as
far as the Middle Ages. For a long time, ever since the days of the Polish
empire, a commune of beggars and blind men has existed in Mogilëv on the
Dnieper. These beggars – known to the people as the ‘Old Men of Mogilëv’
– have their own elders and teachers, the Masters.
   The Masters train the new members of the commune in the complicated
ways of their craft – how to chant the religious verses and beg for alms –
and teach them the demanding laws of the beggars’ world. The beggars are
scattered all across Polesia, Belorussia and Ukraine, but every year the
Masters gather in some secret place – an isolated inn on the marshes or
some abandoned forester’s hut – for trials or the admission of new beggars
into the commune. The Old Men of Mogilëv have their own language that
outsiders can’t understand. In times of trouble, in the years of popular
unrest, these beggars became a terrible force. They kept the peasants’ anger
alive with their ballads about the wicked rule of the Polish landowners and
the heavy burdens of the exploited village folk.
   After this tale, the region of Polesia, where I now found myself, acquired
a completely new image in my mind. It seemed that in this land of swamps
and stunted forests, of mists and wilderness, the fires of resentment and
vengeance, like the sunsets, smouldered but never died out. From then on,
the rags of the beggars smelled to me not of bread and the dust of the road,
but of gunpowder and arson. I now looked more closely at the blind men
and paupers, and I realised that the special tribe to which they belonged was
not merely that of the unfortunates but of gifted men of ruthless will.
   ‘Why have they gathered at the inn on the Braginka?’ asked Sevryuk.
   ‘Who knows? They gather every year,’ Trofim answered, unwillingly.
‘Have the guards been sniffing around here?’
   ‘No, but we’ve heard they were at Komarin yesterday,’ Sevryuk replied.
   ‘Oh well.’ Trofim got up. ‘Thank you. I’m going up to the hayloft for
some rest.’
   Trofim left, though he didn’t go to the hayloft, but out into the forest, and
he only returned the following morning. Marina Pavlovna told me the story
of the young boy who had been the blind man’s guide. Two days earlier, the
two had walked onto the estate of a wealthy landowner named
Lyubomirsky. They were driven out of the courtyard, and as they went the
Ingush watchman (many wealthy landowners in those days hired Ingush
men as their guards) let the wolfhound off its chain, and it ran after them.
The blind man stopped, but the boy panicked and ran. The wolfhound
caught the boy and killed him. The blind man had saved himself by
standing absolutely still. The wolfhound just sniffed him, growled and then
walked off. The peasants found the boy’s body and brought it to Pogonnoe.
The boy was to be buried tomorrow.
   I liked the Sevryuks. Marina Pavlovna was a magnificent rider and a
crack shot. She was small, but very strong, and walked with a swift, light
step. She held harsh opinions, which she expressed in a characteristic drawl,
and loved to read historical novels such as Danilevsky’s Fugitives of
Novorossiya.1 Sevryuk had the look of a sick man. He was very thin and
had a mocking air about him. He ignored his neighbours, preferring the
company of peasants, and kept himself busy tending to his small estate. As
for the student, Marina’s brother, he spent his days hunting. In his spare
time, he filled cartridges, cast shot and cleaned his double-barrelled Belgian
gun.
   The next day we went to the village of Pogonnoe. We took a ferry across
the deep and cold Braginka. The wind rustled in the willows along the
banks. On this side of the river, a sandy road ran between the edge of the
forest and a swamp. The swamp stretched to the horizon, losing itself in the
hazy light. Its pools of water reflected the sun like so many windows,
swathes of flowers formed yellow islands, and the grey sedge could be
heard bending in the wind. I had never in my life seen such enormous
marshlands. Far from the road amid the luxuriant green quagmire stood a
blackened, slanting cross marking the spot where a hunter had drowned
many years ago.
   We could hear the funeral bells coming from Pogonnoe. Our carriage
drove into the empty village with its small huts, their roofs covered with
rotting straw. Squawking chickens fluttered about trying to avoid the
horses’ hooves. A crowd had formed in front of the wooden church.
Through the open doors we could see burning candles, whose light fell on
garlands of paper roses decorating the icons. As we entered the church, the
crowd fell silent and parted to let us pass. The boy was lying in a narrow
pine coffin, his flaxen hair carefully combed; a tall, thin candle had been
placed in his bloodless hands across his chest. As it burned, the candle bent,
dripping wax on the boy’s yellow fingers. A scruffy priest in a black
vestment hurriedly prayed and swung the censer. I looked at the boy. He
seemed to be trying to remember something but couldn’t think of it.
   Sevryuk touched my arm. I turned around. He motioned with his eyes off
to one side of the coffin. I looked. There the old beggars stood in a row.
They were all dressed in identical brown robes, in their hands were old
wooden staffs, rubbed shiny with age. Their grey heads were raised to gaze
at a painting of a silver-bearded Lord of Hosts hanging over the altar. The
image looked strangely like them – the same sunken, threatening eyes, the
same lean, dark face.
   ‘The Masters!’ Sevryuk whispered to me.
   The beggars stood motionless, neither crossing themselves nor bowing.
The space around them was empty. Behind the beggars I could see two
boys, blind men’s guides, with canvas bags on their backs. One of them was
quietly crying and wiping his nose with his sleeve. The other stood there,
his eyes lowered, laughing. Women sighed. Sometimes the dull rumble of
men’s voices carried in from the church porch. The priest would look up
and begin to pray in a louder voice. The rumble then died down. All of a
sudden, the beggars moved towards the coffin, silently lifted it up and
carried it out of the church. Behind them the two boys led the blind men.
   The coffin was lowered into the ground at the cemetery, which was
crowded with old, crooked crosses. Water had already begun to seep into
the grave. The priest said a last prayer, took off his vestment, rolled it up
and walked, limping, out of the cemetery. Two aged peasants spat on their
hands and picked up their shovels. Just then a blind man with the face of a
hawk came forward and said: ‘People, wait!’ The crowd fell silent. Feeling
for the edge of the grave with his stick, he bowed over the coffin and,
staring straight ahead with his white eyes, began to chant:

       Under a dry willow, beside a shallow brook,
       Wearied from the road, the Lord took His rest,
       The people came to Him from all around,
       And laid their offerings before Him on the ground.

The crowd moved closer to the blind man.

       Women gave him Him honey and homespun, and girls their
         necklaces,
       Old men gave Him black bread, old women gave Him icons,
       A little girl offered Him periwinkles,
       Laying them at His feet before running off
       To hide behind the barn. The Lord smiled,
       And then asked: ‘But who will give me his heart?
       Who would not begrudge me his heart?’

A young woman in a white shawl cried softly. The blind man fell silent,
turned towards her and went on:

       Then a young lad brought Him his heart,
       It fluttered like a dove, and he laid it in His hands.
       The Lord looked and saw it was pierced and covered with blood.
       It was tarnished and as black as the earth,
       Blackened from tears and perpetual suffering,
       From the boy’s wanderings across this earth,
       Leading the blind and having never known happiness.

The beggar held his hands out in front of him.

       The Lord stood and lifted this weak heart,
       All-powerful He arose and cursed the unrighteousness of men.
       Black clouds settled over the earth,
       Thunder crashed over the forests,
       And the mighty voice of the Lord rang out.

Here the blind man suddenly smiled with joy.

       ‘I shall bring this heart to My heavenly throne,
       And keep it as a rare gift from the human race,
       Before which all good souls may bow down.’

The blind man fell silent, paused for a moment, and then sang in a powerful
yet muffled voice:

       This orphan’s heart is richer than diamonds,
       More splendid than flowers, brighter than the stars,
       Because it was given by a beautiful young boy
       As a humble gift to Almighty God.

   The women in the crowd wiped their eyes with the ends of their dark
kerchiefs. ‘Give alms, good people,’ the blind man said, ‘for the soul of
Vasily, the innocent murdered boy.’ He held out his battered old cap.
Copper coins were tossed in. The two men began to shovel dirt into the
grave. We slowly made our way back to the church, where our horses were
waiting. Marina Pavlovna walked in front. No one said a word the entire
way. Only Trofim spoke. ‘People have been living on earth for thousands of
years, and yet they’ve still not learned to be good. How strange.’
   After the boy’s funeral, fear descended on the Sevryuks’ estate. The
doors were now secured with heavy locks in the evening, and Sevryuk and
the student got out of bed every night to patrol the estate with loaded guns.
One night someone lit a campfire in the woods. It burned until dawn. In the
morning, Trofim reported that a stranger had spent the night there. ‘Must
have been one of Gon’s men,’ he added. ‘Been circling around here like
wolves.’ Later that day a barefoot fellow in black army trousers with faded
red piping walked onto the estate. He had his boots slung over his shoulder.
His face was peeling from sunburn. His eyes were sullen and watchful. He
asked for a drink. Marina Pavlovna brought him a jug of milk and a loaf of
bread. The fellow gulped down the milk and then said: ‘You’re a brave lot.
You’re not afraid to live in such a place.’
   ‘No one is going to harm us,’ said Marina Pavlovna.
   ‘Why’s that?’ the fellow laughed.
   ‘Because we don’t do any harm to anyone.’
   ‘Others might see it differently,’ he said, cryptically, and then left.
   This encounter is why Marina Pavlovna was not pleased about Sevryuk
leaving the next day for a neighbouring village to buy provisions and
gunpowder. Sevryuk took me with him. We had planned to be back that
evening.
   I enjoyed our ride through the deserted countryside. The road ran through
the marshlands and over sandy hills overgrown with small, stunted pines.
The turning wheels produced a steady trickle of sand. Grass snakes
slithered across the road in front of us. It was a sultry day, and we could see
the hot air hanging over the swamps. In the little Jewish village, goats
wandered about on the roofs of the houses and nibbled on the moss. A
wooden star of David had been nailed above the entrance to the synagogue.
In the square, hay littered the ground and the drowsy horses belonging to a
unit of dragoons stood about. The soldiers, red-faced from the hot sun, lay
on the ground near their horses. They had unbuttoned their uniforms and
were lazily singing:

       Soldiers, O you brave fellows, where are your women?
       See here our loaded cannons? These are our women!

   Their officer sat on the inn’s front porch drinking a glass of cloudy kvass.
We visited the shops, called ‘vaults’. It was cool and dark inside them.
Pigeons pecked at the grain in the scales. The Jewish shopkeepers in their
shiny black caps complained that there was no point in trading because all
their profits went in bribes to the head of the district police. They told us
that the day before yesterday Andrei Gon had raided a nearby estate and
made off with four excellent horses. In one of the ‘vaults’ they served us
pink-coloured sweets and tea that smelled faintly of paraffin.
   We were late leaving the village. Sevryuk whipped the horses, but they
quickly tired in the heavy sand and could only manage a slow walk. Clouds
of flies swarmed over their rumps; the horses swished feverishly with their
stringy tails trying to keep them off. A thunderstorm was brewing to the
south. The swamps darkened. The wind picked up, shaking the trees and
carrying the smell of water. Lightning flashed, and far off in the distance the
earth rumbled.
   ‘We’ll have to turn off and stop at the inn on the Braginka,’ said Sevryuk.
‘We’ll spend the night there. We wasted too much time back in the village.’
   We turned onto an almost invisible forest road. The wheels of the
carriage kept banging on the tree roots. It began to grow dark. The woods
thinned out. A damp breeze met our faces, and we drove up to an inn, black
against the sky’s fading light. It stood on the very banks of the Braginka
under some willows. Behind it, the ground was overgrown with nettles and
hemlock in the shape of tall umbrellas. From this fragrant undergrowth
came the anxious clucking of chickens, frightened and seeking shelter from
the approaching storm.
   A stout, elderly Jew came out onto the sagging porch – this was Leizer,
the innkeeper. He was wearing boots. A red sash held up his trousers, which
were as baggy as a Gypsy’s. Leizer smiled sweetly and closed his eyes.
   ‘What a guest!’ he exclaimed, shaking his head. ‘It’s easier to find a
diamond in the forest than to entice such a pleasant guest to my inn. Please,
be so kind as to enter my immaculate establishment.’
   Despite the sweet smile, Leizer watched us warily from under his
swollen, red eyelids.
   ‘I know, Leizer,’ said Sevryuk, ‘that the Masters are here at the inn.
Don’t worry. It’s none of our business. All sorts of folk visit the inn!’
   ‘What can I do?’ Leizer asked with a heavy sigh. ‘All around us nothing
but forests and bogs. Can I choose my lodgers? I’m sometimes frightened
of them myself, Pan Sevryuk.’
   We went in. The scrubbed floorboards creaked under our steps. Over
time the room had settled, and everything in it was slightly askew. A
bloated, white-haired woman was sitting in a bed, propped up by pink
pillows.
   ‘My dear mamma,’ explained Leizer. ‘She has dropsy. Dvoira!’ he
shouted. ‘Get the samovar ready!’
   A little woman with a sad face, Leizer’s wife, peeped out from behind a
curtain and greeted us. The windows were closed because of the storm.
Flies were beating themselves against the glass. A flyblown portrait of
General Kuropatkin hung on the wall. Leizer brought hay for our bedding.
He laid it on the floor and covered it with heavy sacking. We sat down at
the table to drink our tea when all of a sudden there was a clap of thunder so
heavy it made the china jump. The rain drummed on the inn’s roof with a
heavy, steady beat. Grey streams poured down the dark windows
illuminated now and then by bleary flashes of lightning. The downpour
drowned out the hiss of the samovar. We ate rolls with our tea, which had
not tasted so good in a long time. I liked the inn, and this feeling of
complete isolation, the sound of the rain, the thunder in the woods. From
the far side of the wall, we could just barely make out the voices of the
beggars.
   I was tired from the jolting of the cart and the long, hot day and fell
asleep on the hay as soon as I had finished my tea. I awoke in the middle of
the night drenched in sweat. The heavy smell of paraffin filled the room.
The night light flickered. The old woman moaned in her sleep. Sevryuk sat
up next to me.
   ‘Let’s go and lie down in the cart or this fug will give me a heart attack,’
he said.
   We tiptoed out. The cart was in a shed. We spread out some hay, lay
down and covered ourselves with some sacking. The thunderstorm had
passed. Stars shone in the moist air over the woods. We could hear the rain
dripping off the roof. The smell of wet weeds filtered into the shed. A door
creaked. Someone came out of the inn. Sevryuk whispered: ‘Keep quiet.
That must be the Masters.’ Someone sat down on a log by the shed and
struck a flint. There was a quick flash, followed by the smell of cheap
tobacco.
   ‘As soon as we can see the flames, we’ll be on our way,’ said a squeaky
voice. ‘Or else they’ll catch us.’
   ‘That’s right,’ another voice croaked. ‘We’ve stayed here at Leizer’s too
long already. The Archangels are on the prowl.’
   ‘Nothing’s visible yet. Maybe it’s too wet from the rain to burn,’ came a
third voice, younger and full of worry.
   ‘For Gon’s men, nothing’s too wet, or too much trouble,’ replied the
squeaky voice.
   ‘They’ll do whatever they want,’ the croaky voice warned. ‘They’ll
avenge the trouble we’ve caused. We’ll witness God’s punishment,
assuming we still have eyes to see.’
   The beggars fell silent.
   ‘Petro, is everyone ready?’ the first man asked.
   ‘Everyone,’ answered the young man.
   ‘Then tell them to come out. And don’t bother with Leizer. He’s already
taken his share of the money, and his business doesn’t concern us. What
about those travellers who just arrived? Are they asleep?’
   ‘Yes, why wouldn’t they be?’
   Again the men fell silent. I stirred, and Sevryuk put his hand on my arm.
A few more men came out of the inn.
   ‘Kuzma and I are heading for Ovruch and then on to Chernobyl,’ said a
familiar voice. ‘Maybe I’ll find a new guide near Chernobyl. The people
there are starving.’ It was the blind man who’d sung over the boy’s grave in
Pogonnoe.
   It grew quiet once more. My heart was pounding. A long time seemed to
pass, and then I heard a soft voice. ‘There it is.’
   The beggars started to move.
   ‘Well, brothers,’ said the man with the croaky voice, ‘let’s say a prayer
and then be on our way.’
   ‘Our Father, who art in heaven,’ the beggars recited quietly, ‘hallowed be
thy name. Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done . . .’
   The men rose and left.
   ‘What were they talking about?’ I asked Sevryuk.
   ‘I don’t know,’ he said. ‘I’m going out for a smoke.’
   He got up and left the shed. Suddenly, I heard his shocked voice out of
the darkness.
   ‘What’s that? Come here, quick.’
   I raced out. Beyond the young willows on the far side of the Braginka the
sky was a smoky pink. Tall showers of sparks seemed to be coming from
the bushes around us. The light of the fire glowed dimly on the water.
   ‘What’s that burning?’ asked Sevryuk.
   ‘That’s Lyubomirsky’s place,’ Leizer answered in the darkness next to us.
We had not even heard him come up. ‘Pan Sevryuk, have pity on yourself
and on a poor innkeeper,’ he begged. ‘I’ll harness your horses, and then go,
go with God’s speed. It’d be best if you weren’t here.’
   ‘Why?’
   ‘The dragoons might arrive at any moment from the village, or the border
guards. They can’t get anything from the innkeeper. The innkeeper didn’t
say or hear anything.’
   ‘We didn’t see anything either,’ said Sevryuk.
   ‘Sir!’ Leizer pleaded. ‘I beg you in the name of your Orthodox God! Go.
I don’t need your money. I just want to be left alone in peace. Don’t you see
what’s happening here?’
   ‘Well, all right, all right,’ Sevryuk agreed. ‘You certainly are a man of
weak nerves, Leizer. Go and harness the horses.’
   Leizer quickly harnessed the horses, and we drove off.
   The road followed the banks of the Braginka. Sevryuk dropped the reins
and let the horses walk at their own pace. The flames grew higher. Wet
branches slapped our faces.
   ‘Now I get it,’ said Sevryuk. ‘They’ve set fire to Lyubomirsky’s.’
   ‘Who did?’
   ‘I don’t know. It must be because of the boy. But you and I didn’t stay at
the inn, and we didn’t see a thing. Understood?’
   ‘Understood,’ I said.
   We heard a faint but distinct whistle from across the Braginka. Sevryuk
reined in the horses. We heard it again. Sevryuk had stopped the cart by
some thick undergrowth; no one could see us.
   ‘Hey, innkeeper!’ came a soft voice from the far bank, ‘ferry me across!’
   No one answered. We kept listening. There was a splash. The man had
apparently jumped into the water and was trying to swim across. Through
the undergrowth we could now see him, illuminated by the faint glow of the
fire. He had made it halfway and was struggling mightily against the
current. The man scrambled up onto the bank not far from us. We could
hear the water pouring off him.
   ‘Just you wait, Leizer, you’ll pay for this crossing later,’ he said and then
walked off into the woods.
   After the sound of his footsteps had died away, we slowly drove on.
   ‘Did he seem familiar?’ Sevryuk asked in a barely audible voice.
   ‘What?’ I asked, confused.
   ‘That man. Did you recognise him?’
   ‘No.’
   ‘The fellow who showed up at our place. We gave him milk. That
sounded to me like his voice. Now it makes sense. The Masters must have
complained to Gon, and he sent one of his men to set Lyubomirsky’s house
on fire. At least that’s what I think. Leizer ferried him to the other side of
the river. But don’t forget, we haven’t seen anything, and we don’t know
anything.’
   Sevryuk lit a cigarette, carefully shielding the match with a fold of his
raincoat. The fire’s glow rose ever higher, twisting in the night sky. The
river gurgled in the flooded undergrowth, the axles squeaked. Later, a cold
mist rose over the marches. Wet and chilled to the bone, we didn’t arrive
back at the estate until dawn.
   After this incident, anxious days followed. I actually enjoyed them. I
liked the constant expectation of danger, the hushed conversations, the
rumours Trofim brought back about how Gon had suddenly been sighted
now here, now there. I liked the cold Braginka and its reeds – certainly the
hiding place for bandits – and the hoofmarks on the road that appeared
mysteriously in the night. I’ll even admit I hoped Andrei Gon would make a
raid on the Sevryuks’ estate, so long as he didn’t burn down the house or
kill anyone. But instead of Andrei Gon, the dragoons appeared one evening
at dusk. They dismounted near the gates, and their officer strode up in his
dusty boots to the verandah where we were having tea. He excused himself
for disturbing us and asked: ‘Are you the master here, Sevryuk?’
   ‘Yes, I am,’ replied Sevryuk. ‘How can I help you?’
   The officer turned to his men. ‘Hey, Marchenko!’ he yelled. ‘Bring him
here!’
   Two dragoons brought out a bare-footed man from behind the horses. His
hands were bound behind his back. He wore black soldier’s trousers with
faded red piping. They led him to the verandah. He stared at Marina
Pavlovna as though he wanted to tell her something.
   ‘Do you know this fellow?’ asked the officer.
   No one said a word.
   ‘Take a closer look.’
   ‘No,’ said Marina Pavlovna, the blood draining from her face. ‘I’ve never
seen this man before.’
   The man shuddered and lowered his eyes.
   ‘And you?’ the officer asked Sevryuk.
   ‘No. I don’t know him.’
   ‘Well, my friend,’ the officer said, turning to the man, ‘it’s nothing but a
pack of lies you’ve been telling us about working here on the Sevryuks’
estate. No one but yourself to blame.’
   ‘All right!’ the man said. ‘Take me away. But don’t think might makes
right.’
   Marina Pavlovna sprang out of her chair and went back inside the house.
   ‘That’s enough talk out of you!’ the officer said. ‘Take him away!’
   The dragoons rode off. Marina Pavlovna cried for a long time.
   ‘The way he was looking at me,’ she said through her tears. ‘How did I
not see it? I should have said that I knew him and he works here for us.’
   ‘How could you have guessed?’ Trofim said, trying to comfort her. ‘He
could’ve at least given some sort of sign. He certainly gave it to
Lyubomirsky. Burned every last thing over there down to the ground, he
did, for murdering that boy.’
   Soon afterwards I left for Kiev. Polesia remained in my memory as a sad
and somewhat enigmatic place. It would go on growing buttercups and
sweet flags, its alders and willows would still rustle in the wind, but its
church bells, so it seemed, would never call the mute peasants to a joyous
celebration. So I thought then. Fortunately, things turned out quite
differently.


1 Grigory Danilevsky (1829–90), author of novels on the history of
Ukraine, including this, his first novel (1862).

                              OceanofPDF.com
31
My Grandmother’s Garden



Grandmother     Vikentia Ivanovna had been living in Cherkassy together
with Aunt Yevfrosinia Grigorievna. Grandfather had already been dead a
long time, and then while I was in Polesia for the summer, Aunt Yevfrosinia
died of a heart attack. So, Grandmother Vikentia moved to Kiev to live with
one of her other daughters, my Aunt Vera, who was married to a wealthy
businessman. Aunt Vera had a large home in Lukyanovka on the edge of the
city. They put Grandmother up in a small cottage there in the garden.
   After living on her own in Cherkassy, Grandmother felt like some
hanger-on in Aunt Vera’s grand home. She kept her shame to herself and
managed to take a little bit of comfort in the fact that she had her own place,
could cook her own meals, and did not have to live under the same roof
with, and so feel even more indebted to, her rich daughter.
   Grandmother was lonely, and she talked me into leaving Pani
Kozlovskaya and coming to live with her in the cottage. There were four
small rooms. Grandmother lived in one, an old cellist by the name of
Gattenberger lived in another, and I was given the third room. Even though
it was called the sun porch, the fourth room was cold and had nothing in it
but flowerpots covering the whole floor.
   When I returned from Polesia in the middle of the summer the city was
empty. Everyone had moved to their dachas. Borya had left for an
internship in Yekaterinoslav. The only people at Lukyanovka were
Grandmother Vikentia Ivanovna and Gattenberger.
   Grandmother had aged a great deal. She was bent over and had lost her
former strict demeanour, but nonetheless she had not given up her old
habits. She still rose at dawn every day, flung the windows wide open and
then made herself coffee over a spirit lamp. After her coffee, she went out
into the garden, sat down in her wicker chair and read her favourite books –
countless novels by Kraszewski or the stories of Korolenko and Eliza
Orzeszkowa.1 She often fell asleep over a book – her grey head drooping,
dressed all in black, her thin arms lying at her side. Butterflies settled on her
arms and her black widow’s cap. Soft, ripe plums fell from the trees and
landed in the grass with a muffled thud. A warm breeze blew through the
garden, scattering shadows of leaves along the paths. High over
Grandmother’s head shone the sun – the bright hot sun of the Kiev summer
– and I would think to myself as I watched her that one day Grandmother
would fall asleep for good here in the fresh warmth of this garden.
   We were friends. I loved her more than any of my other relations. She felt
the same way about me. Grandmother had raised three daughters and two
sons, but now in her old age she was all alone. We were both lonely and this
helped to bring us together. Grandmother radiated kindness and melancholy.
Despite the difference in age, we had a lot in common. She loved poetry,
books, trees, the sky and daydreams. She never forced me to do anything.
   Grandmother’s only weakness was that at the slightest sign of a cold she
forced on me her own well-tried remedy which she called ‘the spiritus’. It
was devilish stuff. She took wine, wood alcohol and liquid ammonia and
mixed them together with turpentine and any other spirits she could get her
hands on. It was a blood-red liquid, as caustic as nitric acid. Grandmother
rubbed this ‘spiritus’ all over my chest and back. She was convinced of its
healing properties. A harsh, burning smell filled the cottage. Gattenberger
immediately lit a fat cigar, and the fog of its pleasant bluish smoke chased
the acrid aroma from his room.
   It was usually when Gattenberger was playing the cello that Grandmother
fell asleep in the garden. Gattenberger was a handsome old man with a
curly white beard and piercing grey eyes. He liked to play one of his own
compositions by the name of ‘The Death of Hamlet’. The cello sobbed, and
the cascade of chords, as though reverberating beneath the vaults of
Elsinore, rose to a solemn climax: ‘Let four captains bear Hamlet, like a
soldier, to the stage.’
   Listening to the music, I imagined the great hall at Elsinore, the narrow
Gothic shafts of sunlight, the fanfare, and over Hamlet’s dead body
enormous banners – tall and light, reaching to the floor and rustling softly.
The stream had long ago borne Ophelia’s bouquet down to the sea. Far from
shore a halo of rosemary and rue, the last symbol of her bitter love, drifted
among the waves. This too one heard in the music of his cello.
   Grandmother woke up and said: ‘My God, can’t you play something
cheery?’
   To please her, Gattenberger would then play her favourite pastorale from
The Queen of Spades: ‘My tender friend, my darling shepherd . . .’
   Music wearied Grandmother. She got a rest from it in the evening when
Gattenberger left with his cello to play with the orchestra in the Merchants’
Park. I often went to the concerts. The orchestra played in an expansive
white wooden bandshell and the audience sat under the open sky. Large
beds with stocks and nicotiana gave off a strong, sweet smell in the twilight.
The beds were watered before every concert. The musicians sat under
bright lights; the audience in utter darkness. The women’s white dresses
glimmered faintly, the trees swayed, and now and then summer lightning
flashed over our heads. I especially loved those damp, overcast evenings
when only a few people came to the concerts in the park. It seemed as if the
orchestra was playing just for me and a girl in a floppy hat. I saw her at
almost every concert. She always gave me a look. I watched her furtively.
Once she caught me looking at her, and I thought I saw her eyes flash with a
mischievous fire.
   That boring summer in Kiev began to fill with dreams of this unknown
girl, and soon I was no longer bored. Even the loud echoing of the rain that
summer now seemed full of life and excitement. The rain pounded the
garden’s greenery with a fury from on high. The glass drops, flying from
the clouds, seemed to strike the keys of a musical instrument, sending
chords of sound into my room. It seemed like a true miracle that ordinary
water – the kind that drips off a roof into a green tub – could sing in such a
way.
   ‘All summer, nothing but rain and more rain!’ said Grandmother. ‘Well,
at least it’s good for the crops.’
   Somewhere beyond the light haze of these ‘blinding rains’ and the
shimmer of the rainbows lived the unknown girl. I was grateful to her for
appearing in my life and changing everything around me. Even the city’s
yellow-brick pavement with its little puddles became beautiful and
wondrous, like something out of a tale by Hans Christian Andersen. Grass
sprouted in the cracks between the bricks, and ants struggled through the
puddles.
   When I entered into the depths of my fantasy world or, as my
grandmother, using the Polish, called them, my ‘marzenia’, I thought
everything was amazing, even the pavements of Kiev. Even now I don’t
know what to call this state of mind. It came from a number of invisible
sources. There was not an ounce of exultation in it. Just the opposite, it was
accompanied by a sense of peace and calm, and it disappeared at the first
sign of worry. This mood demanded expression, and it was during that hot
summer with its ‘blinding rains’ that I began to write.
   I hid this from Grandmother. She was surprised that I had been spending
hour after hour alone in my room writing, so I told her that I was taking
notes on the books I had read in preparation for my literature classes in the
autumn.
   When there were no concerts in the Merchants’ Park, I went off to the
Dnieper or to a neglected park called ‘Cheer Up’ on the edge of the city
which belonged to a patron of the arts by the name of Kulzhenko. For a few
cigarettes, the keeper let me into the park – it was completely empty and
overgrown with weeds. The ponds were choked with duckweed. Jackdaws
chattered in the trees. The rotting benches swayed and buckled when I tried
to sit down. The only person I ever encountered in the park was an old
artist. He sat sketching under a large linen umbrella. He always gave me
angry looks, and so I made certain never to go near him.
   I liked to go to a deserted house deep in the park to sit and read on the
steps of the verandah. Sparrows flitted about behind me. I often put my
book down to look out into the park. Smoky shafts of light filtered through
the trees. I waited. I was certain that here, in this park, I would meet her, the
stranger. But she never came, and I returned home, taking the most
roundabout way – on the tram through Priorka and Podol, then along
Kreshchatik and Proreznaya Street. Along the way I stopped to visit the
Idzikovskaya Library on Kreshchatik. It was always empty in the summer.
The young assistants working there exchanged my books. Their faces were
pale from the heat and sweat glistened on their moustaches. I borrowed
books for Grandmother and myself. Given my condition at the time, all I
could read was poetry. For Grandmother I brought home novels by
Spielhagen and Bolesław Prus.2
   I arrived home at Lukyanovka tired and happy, my face glowing from the
sun and fresh air. Grandmother was waiting for me. She had supper ready in
her room on a small round table covered with a tablecloth. I told her about
‘Cheer Up’ Park. She nodded as she listened. Now and then she said that
she had had a long and lonely day at home, but not once did she scold me
for having disappeared like that. ‘Youth has its own laws,’ said
Grandmother. ‘It’s not my place to interfere with them.’
    I went to my room, undressed and lay down in my narrow bed. My lamp
lit the crooked branches of the apple tree just outside my window. Yielding
to the embrace of a fragile sleep, I could sense the night around me, its
darkness and infinite quiet. I loved nighttime, even though I was terrified by
the thought that in the stillness above Lukyanovka and our cottage,
Sagittarius and Aquarius, Gemini and Virgo were passing by far overhead.
    I wrote a short story about that summer in Kiev. I included everything in
it: the cellist Gattenberger, the girl from the Merchants’ Park, ‘Cheer Up’,
the nights, and a dreamy, somewhat ridiculous boy. I worked hard on it for a
long time. The harder I worked the less defined my words became; they
became mushy and soft like cotton wool. I had crammed the story with so
many beautiful things that even I found it rather overwrought. At times I
gave way to despair.
    At the time there was a magazine in Kiev with the strange title of The
Knight. Its editor was the famous local writer and lover of the arts Yevgeny
Kuzmin. I hesitated for a long time, but eventually screwed up my courage
and took my story to The Knight’s editorial office. It was located in
Kuzmin’s flat. A small, polite schoolboy opened the door and showed me to
Kuzmin’s study. A spotted bulldog sat drooling on the rug and looked up at
me with diseased eyes. The room was stuffy. There was the smell of scented
candles. The white masks of Greek gods and goddesses hung on the black
walls. Everywhere stood large piles of books in dried-out leather bindings.
    I waited. I could hear the crackling of the leather books. Kuzmin entered
– he was very tall and very thin and had long white fingers with shiny silver
rings on them. He spoke to me respectfully, his head bowed. I blushed and
tried to work out how I could get out of there. I was now convinced that my
story was terrible and that I was an inarticulate fool. Kuzmin leafed through
my story with his limp fingers, pausing to mark something with a long,
sharp fingernail.
    ‘My periodical’, he said, ‘is a forum for young writers. I would very
much like to find one more worthy contributor. I’ll read your story and send
you a postcard.’
    ‘If it’s no trouble, please send your reply in an envelope.’
    Kuzmin gave me a knowing smile and nodded.
   I left. Gasping for breath, I raced down the stairs and out into the street.
Men were out washing down the pavement with hoses. The water chugged
and gurgled, and some of it splashed me in the face. I felt a bit better. I
jumped on a moving tram to get away from there as quickly as possible.
The passengers looked up and began to laugh at me. I jumped off and
walked.
   Dust from hay and firewood hung in the air over the Senny Market.
Identical round clouds sailed above Lvovskaya Street. There was a sharp
smell of horse manure. An old grey horse pulled a cart with bags of coal.
Alongside walked a man with a coal-black face. From time to time he
called out in a doleful voice: ‘Coal? Anybody need any coal?’
   I remembered my story, with its purple prose and vague notions about
life, lying there on the desk back in Kuzmin’s stuffy office. I felt ashamed
of myself and swore never to write another story. ‘It’s all wrong, it’s all
wrong!’ I said over and over. ‘But then, even if it’s bad, maybe there’s
something there in it?’
   I didn’t know a thing and was utterly lost.
   I turned onto Glubochitskaya Street in the direction of Podol. Cobblers
sat out in the cold hammering the soles of old shoes. Every time their
hammers fell, the aged leather released little puffs of dust. Boys fired stones
at sparrows with their catapults. A cart carried flour. The bags had holes in
them and flour spilled onto the road. Women hung up coloured clothes on
lines in the back gardens. The wind was blowing, sending litter high up into
the air over Podol. On the hill, St Andrew’s Church – Rastrelli’s
magnificent creation – with its silver domes and red columns glittered in the
sun. I went into a tavern and drank a glass of sour wine. It didn’t help me
feel any better.
   I returned home with a headache early that evening. Grandmother
immediately rubbed me down with ‘spiritus’ and put me to bed. I was
certain that I had made an irreparable mistake – I had written an atrocious
story and as a result had ruined any chance of ever writing again for the rest
of my life. I knew no one who could tell me what I was to do next. Was it
truly possible to give all of yourself to what you loved most, only to
discover that your efforts were futile?
   Gattenberger was playing softly in his room. He no longer played ‘The
Death of Hamlet’, but selections from a new composition, ‘A Feast During
the Plague’. He had been working on this for some time and played parts of
it for Grandmother and me. As always, Grandmother was astounded by
Gattenberger’s love of gloomy themes.
   ‘One minute it’s death, the next it’s the plague!’ she complained. ‘I just
don’t understand it. I think music should make people happy.’
   Gattenberger had come to his favourite part:

       And pitiful moans resounded long and loud
       Along the banks of the streams and brooks,
       Which now run peacefully and happily
       Through the wild paradise of your native land!

   ‘That’s better,’ I muttered. ‘There’s truth in that – “Through the wild
paradise of your native land”.’
   Wild paradise! These words hit me like a healing wind. In a word, I knew
what I had to do. I had to strive, I had to work, to persevere. I knew the path
would be long and hard, but for some reason this knowledge calmed me.
   Two days later Kuzmin’s postcard arrived. He had ignored my request to
send it in a sealed envelope. He wrote that he had read my story and was
publishing it in the next issue of the magazine. Grandmother had, of course,
read the postcard. It had made her cry.
   ‘Your father, Georgy Maximovich, used to laugh at me, but he was a
good man,’ she said. ‘I’m sorry he didn’t live to see this.’ She made the sign
of the cross over me and then gave me a kiss. ‘Well, work hard and be
happy. I see now that God took pity on me and sent me this joy late in my
life.’
   She was more excited about my first story than I was.
   When The Knight came out with my story in it, Grandmother baked a
mazurek cake and prepared a special celebratory breakfast. She even put on
her black silk dress that morning, which she typically only wore for Easter.
She pinned to her breast a small corsage of artificial heliotropes. In the past
the dress had made her look young, but not anymore. Nevertheless, when
she looked at me, I could see that her eyes were filled with joy.
   As we ate, wasps buzzed around the jam jar. Gattenberger guessed
somehow what had happened and struck up a mazurka by Wieniawski,3
beating time with his foot as he played.
1 Józef Ignacy Kraszewski (1812–87), prolific Polish novelist, historian and
journalist; Vladimir Korolenko (1853–1921), Ukrainian-Russian writer and
political activist; Eliza Orzeszkowa (née Elžbieta Pawłowska) (1841–1910),
noted Polish writer and social activist.
2 Friedrich Spielhagen (1829–1911), German novelist whose works were
popular in Russia; Aleksander Głowacki (1847–1912) (pen name Bolesław
Prus), Polish novelist and short story writer.
3   Henryk Wieniawski (1835–80), Polish composer and violinist.

                              OceanofPDF.com
32
‘Golden Latin’



Our Latin teacher, Suboch, looked at me with wide eyes. His moustache
quivered. ‘You! A boy in the eighth form! The Devil knows what you’re up
to! I ought to give you a failing mark in comportment. Then you’d sing a
different tune!’
   Suboch was right. The trick or, as we called it, ‘psychological
experiment’ that we had carried out in the Latin class could only be
described by the words ‘the Devil knows what’.
   At one time six pictures had hung on the classroom walls. They had been
taken down long ago, but the large metal hooks had remained. The hooks
gave us an idea for some fun, which we carried it out with skill and
panache.
   Suboch was an intense man. He always exploded into our classroom like
a meteor, his coat tails flying, his pince-nez flashing, his mark book
whizzing through the air and landing perfectly in the centre of his desk with
a thud. Little swirls of dust followed in his wake. The class jumped to its
feet with a clatter of slamming desk lids and then sat down just as noisily.
The glass in the door and windows rattled, startling the sparrows in the
poplars outside and sending them flying off into the depths of the garden.
   This was how Suboch arrived every day. He stopped, removed a tiny
notebook from his pocket, brought it up close to his myopic eyes and then
froze, a pencil quivering slightly in his other hand. A threatening silence
replaced the storm of his entrance. Suboch scanned his notebook for his
next victim.
   One morning, six of the lightest and smallest of the boys, including
myself, were hung by our belts from the metal hooks. The pain was
excruciating: the hooks dug into our backs, taking our breath away. Suboch
flew into the classroom. Just then all the other boys jumped into the rows
between the desks and flipped head over heels to form several lines of
handstands. Suboch was racing at full speed and couldn’t stop. He flung the
mark book onto the desk and at that very moment, just as the book landed,
all the boys returned to their feet with a giant bang and sat down. The six of
us up on the walls undid our belts, fell to the floor, and quickly took our
seats. An ominous, ringing silence filled the air. Complete order reigned in
the classroom. We sat at our desks with innocent expressions as if nothing
had happened.
   Suboch began to rant. We denied everything. With polite insistence we
maintained that nothing had happened – no one had hung from the walls, no
one had executed a handstand. We even hinted that Suboch might be
suffering from delusions.
   He began to shake. He called the six of us who had been hanging on the
wall up to his desk. He looked us over suspiciously from all sides but found
no traces of plaster on our uniforms. Suboch shrugged. He inspected the
hooks and the floor, but here too he found nothing suspicious. A look of
alarm spread across his face: Suboch was always worrying about his health.
   He ordered one of the boys to fetch Supervisor Platon Fëdorovich. The
boy went out and soon returned with the supervisor.
   ‘Did you hear anything unusual at the beginning of the lesson?’ Suboch
asked him.
   ‘No,’ replied Platon Fëdorovich.
   ‘No noise, no crashing?’
   ‘There’s always some noise when the boys stand up and sit down . . .’
Platon Fëdorovich answered cautiously. He had a puzzled look on his face.
   ‘Thank you,’ said Suboch. ‘I had the impression that something strange
was going on in the classroom.’
   ‘What exactly?’ he asked in an insinuating tone.
   Suboch lost his temper. ‘Nothing!’ he snapped. ‘Please excuse me for
troubling you.’
   Platon Fëdorovich held up his hands in a helpless gesture and then
walked out.
   ‘Nobody move,’ Suboch told us, picking up his mark book. ‘I shall be
right back.’
   He left and soon returned with Inspector Varsonofy Nikolaevich, known
by the nickname Varsapont. Varsapont looked at us closely and then walked
over to the wall, climbed up on a desk, and went to pull on one of the
hooks. It popped out of the wall before he had barely touched it. ‘Well,
well!’ he said cryptically, and then stuck it back in the wall.
   We were all watching him.
   ‘Well, well,’ Varsapont repeated. ‘What exactly is going on here? Yes,
well, well,’ he repeated himself now for the third time, and then shook his
head and left the classroom.
   Suboch sat down and stared for a long time at his mark book without
moving. Then he jumped up and tore out of the room. The door shook
behind him. The sparrows scattered once again from their perches in the
poplars. A draught rustled the pages of our textbooks. We sat there trying
our best not to move until the end of the class hour. We were alarmed by the
success of our ‘psychological experiment’ and worried we might have
driven Suboch out of his mind.
   In the end, however, nothing so tragic had occurred. Rumours of our
‘experiment’ spread throughout the school and elicited envious admiration.
The form below us decided to repeat the experiment on one of their
instructors, but, as is well known, a work of true genius can never be
reproduced. Their attempt ended in disastrous failure.
   Suboch found out and flew into a rage. He harangued us in a manner
worthy of Cicero’s famous speech: ‘When, O Cataline, do you mean to
cease abusing our patience? How long is that madness of yours still to mock
us?’ He used his speech for a purpose none of us foresaw. Suboch made us
feel ashamed not for making fun of him, but for acting so disrespectfully
during a lesson devoted to what he called ‘Golden Latin’, the most
magnificent of all the world’s languages.
   ‘Latin!’ he thundered. ‘The language of Ovid and Horace! Of Livy and
Lucretius! Of Marcus Aurelius and Julius Caesar! The language venerated
by the great poets, by Pushkin and Dante, by Goethe and Shakespeare! And
not only did they venerate it, they knew it, and much better than the likes of
you. Golden Latin! Every word of Latin could be cast in pure gold, and you
wouldn’t lose a rouble either, for there isn’t an ounce of waste in the entire
language. It’s utterly pure. And you? Just look at what you’ve done! You
dare to mock it. You dare to turn your Latin class into a circus. Your heads
are stuffed with nothing but nonsense. With rubbish! Jokes! Football!
Snooker! Smoking! Pranks! Moving pictures! Balderdash! Shame on all of
you!’
   Suboch roared. We were crushed by the weight of his accusations and the
picture of our complete worthlessness. But we were also offended. Most of
us, in fact, knew our Latin very well.
   An armistice was soon concluded, and then we experienced ‘Golden
Latin’s’ most glorious triumph. We did everything possible to make it up to
Suboch and worked doubly hard. We got to know Suboch better and
became very fond of him. Finally, the unforgettable day came when Suboch
had to admit that every boy he called to the board deserved top marks.
   ‘I am going to put this down to pure good fortune,’ he said, grinning into
his moustache.
   The next day he tried to trip us up on our ‘unseens’, but again he was
forced to give each one of us a perfect mark. Suboch beamed. But his joy
was overshadowed by a cloud of concern, for such a thing had never
happened to him before. It was some sort of miracle. And then, after the
third day running when again each of us earned top marks, Suboch became
distraught. Our brilliant knowledge of Latin had acquired the appearance of
a scandal. The whole school was talking about it. Ugly rumours began to
spread. Evil tongues were whispering that Suboch was giving us better
marks than we deserved so he could unjustly claim the reputation of being
the school’s best Latin teacher.
   ‘It appears’, Suboch said in an uncertain voice, ‘that I ought to give four
or five of you boys something less than top marks today. What do you
think?’
   Offended, we didn’t say a word. It seemed to us as though Suboch would
be happy if one of us now failed. Perhaps he even regretted making that
inspired speech of his about ‘Golden Latin’. But we couldn’t unlearn what
we already knew. None of us would volunteer to fail our Latin examination
just to shut the mouths of gossipers. We had put our hearts and souls into
our studies, and we had enjoyed it.
   In the end, Suboch surrendered to the general suspicion and arranged for
a public demonstration. He invited the vice-chairman of the District School
Board, the school’s director, Inspector Varsapont and Father Olendsky, an
expert in Latin, to come and observe one of our lessons. Suboch was
merciless and cunning in his attempts to trip us up and find the holes in our
knowledge. But we fought back bravely, parrying each of his blows, and
passed the test in spectacular fashion. The director laughed and rubbed his
hands with glee. Varsapont ruffled his hair in disbelief. The vice-chairman
smiled condescendingly, and Father Olendsky shook his grey head. ‘Oh,
just look at you little polyglots! Oh, you little cheats, Oh, aren’t you clever!’
he said.
   After that we lost our momentum. We simply couldn’t maintain that level
of intensity. The days when every last one of us received top marks were
over. Nevertheless, Suboch’s renown as the school’s finest Latin instructor
remained intact. Nothing could undo that.

                               OceanofPDF.com
33
Instructors of the Humanities



Shulgin, our Russian literature teacher, an elegant old man with a luxuriant
white beard and blue eyes, was known for one unusual personal trait: he
simply could not stand nonsensical remarks. If he heard the least bit of
foolishness, he immediately flew into a rage. He went red in the face,
grabbed textbooks and tore them to shreds or, clenching his fists, shook
them in the face of some terrified schoolboy with such ferocity that you
could hear his round cufflinks clank violently: ‘You! Yes, you! Get out,
now! Please, go! Get out!’
   These fits were followed by complete exhaustion. He was ill, of course.
We knew it, and so did the teachers and the supervisors. If a fit went on too
long, Platon Fëdorovich tiptoed into the classroom, took Shulgin gently by
the shoulders and led him to the teachers’ common room. There he was
revived with essence of valerian.
   By nature Shulgin was a gentle and kind old man. His understanding of
Russian literature was primitive and uninspiring. His system of handing out
marks was haphazard. All the younger boys had to do to improve a poor
mark was to cry on his shoulder. One day in class Shulgin had us write an
essay on the hackneyed theme of ‘Feminine Types in the Works of
Turgenev’. Unexpectedly, Gudim, a cheeky and affected boy whose hands
were always smeared with ink, cried out: ‘The parrots have returned and
just landed on the boulevard!’
   It was the kind of nonsense calculated to drive Shulgin mad. The fit
began that instant. Shulgin grabbed Gudim and shook him so hard that the
boy’s head started bouncing off the wall behind his desk. Next, he tore at
Gudim’s uniform, ripping off the gold buttons in the process.
   Matusevich held Shulgin’s arms while another boy ran off to get Platon
Fëdorovich. Shulgin sat down on a desk, clutched his head and sobbed. For
many of us the sight was too much, and we raised the lids of our desks and
hid. A frightened Inspector Varsapont and Platon Fëdorovich appeared, and
together they took Shulgin away. The room was deadly quiet. Stanishevsky
stood up. He was very pale. He walked slowly over to Gudim and said:
‘You bastard! Get out of here now! Or you’re dead. Understand?’
   Gudim gave him a wicked grin and didn’t move from his desk.
Stanishevsky grabbed him by the front of his uniform, pulled him up and
then threw him on the floor. Gudim got up. The classroom remained silent.
   ‘Understand?’ Stanishevsky repeated.
   Gudim walked unsteadily to the door. He stopped before leaving. He
wanted to say something but saw our cold, angry looks. Dropping his head,
he slunk out. He never came back. He couldn’t have even if he wanted to –
the school’s moral code was ruthless. No exceptions were made. Gudim’s
parents removed him from the gymnasium and sent him to Valker’s
Technical School, a refuge for hooligans and idlers.
   Shulgin also never came back. He was ill for a long time, but even after
he recovered his doctors forbade him from teaching. Sometimes we ran into
him in Nikolaevskaya Square. He liked to sit there and sun himself, resting
his chin on the pommel of his walking stick while children played on the
sand around him. We always bowed to Shulgin, but he just looked at us
with terror in his eyes and said nothing.
   We had no better luck with our next Russian literature teacher.
Trostyansky was a tall, conceited man with a pale face. According to him,
all Russia’s writers could be divided into two categories – decent men
worthy of study and lower-class seditionists whose wasted talent was to be
pitied and best not spoken of. Trostyansky annoyed us. In the essays we
wrote for him we overthrew his gods and elevated his villains. Smiling
politely, he tried to explain to us in a quiet voice that we were mistaken and
gave us low marks.
   Trostyansky was replaced by Selikhanovich, who taught psychology as
well as Russian literature. He looked like the poet Bryusov1 and wore a
black frock coat buttoned up to his chin. He was a sensitive and talented
man. He ‘washed’ Russian literature before us just like expert art restorers
wash old paintings. He cleaned away the dust and grime of decades’ worth
of inaccurate interpretations, classroom boredom, clichés and petty
judgements. Many of us were shocked at what we now saw before us – here
was a literature of magnificent colours, of profound meaning, of rare truth
the likes of which we had never noticed before.
   We learned a great deal from Selikhanovich, and not only Russian
literature. He introduced us to the Renaissance, to nineteenth-century
European philosophy, to the fairytales of Hans Christian Andersen and to
the poetry of The Lay of Igor, whose Old Slavonic text we had up until then
just mindlessly memorised for our examinations.
   Selikhanovich had rare descriptive powers. He talked about the most
complex philosophical theories in such a way that made them clear and
easily grasped, and he filled one with wonder at the enormous powers of the
human mind. Philosophers, writers, scholars and poets, whose names had
meant nothing to us other than a string of dates and ‘Services to Humanity’
to be memorised, became living people. Selikhanovich showed us that they
had never existed on their own but had belonged to concrete historical
epochs.
   In his lectures on Gogol, Selikhanovich conjured up for us the Rome of
his time – its streets, hills and ruins, its artists and carnivals, its very air and
the blue of its sky. A line of amazing men and women all connected to
Rome and its history paraded before our eyes, brought to life by a magic
power that was both simple and available to everyone. This power was
nothing other than knowledge, passion and imagination.
   We passed from one epoch to another, from one interesting place to
another. Through the study of literature, Selikhanovich took us everywhere
– from the armouries of Tula to the Cossack outposts on the border with
Dagestan, from a drizzly autumn day at Boldino to the orphanages and
debtors’ prisons of Dickensian England, from the markets of Paris to
Chopin’s sick bed in an ancient monastery on the island of Majorca, and
even to lonely Taman where the sea wind rustled through the fields of
maize.
   We loved learning about the lives of those writers who had taught us so
much about our country and the world and our notions of beauty – Pushkin,
Lermontov, Tolstoy, Herzen, Ryleev,2 Chekhov, Dickens, Balzac and so
many others. All this knowledge filled us with pride in the power of the
human spirit and of art.
   Along the way, Selikhanovich taught us other things as well, such as
manners and tact. He liked to pose problems. ‘A few people are sitting in a
room,’ he once said. ‘All the chairs are occupied. A woman walks in. You
can see she’s been crying. What should a gentleman do?’
   We replied that he must of course get up and offer her his chair.
   ‘And what would someone who was both polite and tactful do?’ he
asked.
   We had no idea.
   ‘Give her the chair with its back to the light so her eyes aren’t so clearly
visible,’ said Selikhanovich.
   What astonished me about Selikhanovich was what he said upon learning
of my wish to become a writer: ‘Do you have the perseverance for it?’
   I hadn’t thought of it as a necessary trait in being a writer. Later I learned
that he had been right.
   One day he stopped me in the corridor and said: ‘Come to Balmont’s
lecture tomorrow.3 It’s imperative that if you want to write prose you must
know poetry as well.’
   I went to Balmont’s lecture. The title was ‘Poetry as Magic’. It was hot
and crowded inside the Merchants’ Assembly. The candles of two bronze
candelabras burned on a small table covered with a green velvet cloth.
   Balmont came out. He was wearing a frock coat with a flowing silk tie. A
humble camomile peeped out of the hole on his lapel. His thinning
yellowish hair fell in soft curls around his collar. He fixed his eyes on a
point over our heads in a manner that was both mysterious and haughty.
Balmont was no longer a young man. He spoke in a slow, leisurely voice.
After every sentence he paused and listened to his own words, like a pianist
with a foot on the loud pedal listening to the vibration of a chord.
   After the interval Balmont recited some of his verse. It seemed to me that
his poems contained all that wondrous musicality of the Russian language –

       In the deserted woods, a cuckoo cries tenderly,
       So full of longing, of strangeness, the sound of its entreaty.
       Springtime, to me, at once mournful and happy,
       And the beauty of this world an unexpected glory.

He spoke with his small reddish beard pointed up to the ceiling, and his
words broke over the auditorium in waves –

       Like some distant patter of feet, I catch a murmur outside my
         window,
       A strange, unintelligible whispering – the whispering of raindrops.
   Balmont finished. The pendants of the chandeliers vibrated from the
applause. He raised a hand, and everyone fell silent. ‘I am going to read to
you “The Raven” by Edgar Allen Poe,’ he said. ‘But first I want to tell you
a story which shows how fate is, at times, kind to us poets. When Poe died
and was buried in Baltimore, his relatives erected an unbelievably heavy
tombstone over his grave. These Godfearing Quakers, so it seems, wanted
to be certain that the poet’s rebellious spirit remained in the grave and had
no chance of coming back to disturb the peace of honest hard-working
Americans. But when they placed this stone on Poe’s grave, it broke. And
so it lies there to this very day, and every spring pansies grow in the cracks
of this stone.’
   Balmont began to read ‘The Raven’. The gloomy splendour of the poem
filled the hall. It was as if we had magically left Kiev for some dark, snow-
covered plain buffeted by a howling wind. The iron clang of ‘Nevermore’
fell into the emptiness of that night like the striking of a tower clock.
   ‘Nevermore!’ His mind could not accept it. Nevermore? Would Virginia
nevermore walk the earth and would she nevermore knock lightly, shyly on
the heavy door? Would there nevermore be youth, love and happiness?
‘Nevermore!’ cawed the raven, and this little forgotten man, this great
American poet, shrank from loneliness in his worn armchair and looked
with the eyes of a sick child into the cold abyss.
   All my life I have been grateful to Selikhanovich for awakening my love
of poetry. It was poetry that revealed to me the richness of language. In
verse words were reborn, they acquired their full power. The enormous
world of poetic imagery entered into my consciousness as if a blindfold had
been removed from my eyes.
   While Selikhanovich was introducing us to literature and philosophy, old
man Klyachin was opening our eyes to the history of western Europe. Thin,
with a bulging Adam’s apple, screwed-up and rather weak eyes, always
unshaven and his frock coat unbuttoned, Klyachin spoke in a hoarse voice.
He spat out his words in quick, short bursts, like lumps of clay, which he
used to create lifelike statues of Danton, Babeuf, Marat, Napoleon, Louis-
Philippe, Gambetta. We could hear the indignation in his throat when he
talked about the coup of 9 Thermidor or the treachery of Thiers. He would
get so carried away he’d light a cigarette and then catch himself and
immediately put it out on the closest desk.
   Klyachin was an authority on the French Revolution. That a school like
ours even tolerated such a teacher was something of a mystery. Sometimes
he became so overcome with emotion it seemed that he had forgotten he
was talking to a group of schoolboys and not the deputies of the National
Convention. He was a living anachronism and at the same time the most
progressive of all our teachers. At times he seemed to us to be the last of the
Montagnards – an ancient creature who had miraculously lived to a hundred
and ended up in Kiev. Somehow, he had escaped the guillotine and death in
the swamps of Guyana and not lost an ounce of his burning fervour.
   Once in a while Klyachin was too tired to talk about the revolution, and
so he talked to us about Paris in those times – the streets and buildings, the
type of lamps they used to light the squares at night, what the women wore,
the songs sung by the common folk, what the newspapers looked like.
Hearing him talk, many of us wished we could go back a hundred years and
see for ourselves those great events which he had described to us.


1   Valery Bryusov (1873–1924), Symbolist poet and writer.
2 Kondraty Ryleev (1795–1826), poet and leader of the Decembrist Revolt
of 1825.
3 Konstantin Balmont (1867–1942), Symbolist poet, translator of Poe’s
‘The Raven’.

                              OceanofPDF.com
34
A Shot in the Theatre



The polished parquet in the Assembly Hall was like a calm lake reflecting
blue rows of schoolboys, in bright-buttoned uniforms, and flickering
chandeliers. A low murmur reverberated in the hall and then died suddenly.
In walked a short colonel with pale, protruding eyes, his spurs jangling. He
stopped and stared at us. There came the brassy sound of bugles. We stood
to attention.
   The colonel – Nicholas II – was followed by a tall, thin woman, nodding
left and right, in a stiff white dress and an enormous hat sprouting ostrich
feathers. The woman’s face was lifeless, malicious and beautiful. It was
Empress Alexandra.
   Behind the empress in single file came their daughters. They had thin
pale lips and were wearing equally stiff white dresses. The dresses didn’t
crease or fold as they walked and looked as if they had been made of
cardboard. Following the little girls – the grand duchesses – waddled an
enormous lady, rustling loudly in a lilac dress with black lace and a satin
sash across her chest, a gold-rimmed pince-nez on the tip of her nose – old
Lady in Waiting Naryshkina. The fat bulged over her tight silks. She fanned
herself with a little lace handkerchief.
   So began the centenary celebration of our gymnasium.
   The royal suite blocked our view of Nicholas. All we could see was the
carefully plastered hair around the ministers’ bald spots, scarlet ribbons,
white trousers with gold braid, patent leather shoes held tightly in place
with foot straps, the generals’ sharovary and silver sashes.
   Nedelsky, our school’s finest elocutionist, welcomed the tsar with a poem
of his own composition. He spoke in a loud, dry voice and addressed the
tsar with the informal ‘ty’. Then the suite parted, leaving a wide passage
through which Nicholas approached us. He stopped, rubbed his light brown
beard and said slowly and with a slight burr: ‘Greetings, gentlemen.’
   We answered – distinctly but not too loudly – as we had been instructed:
‘We wish Your Imperial Majesty good health!’
   Being the shortest boy in the top form, I was standing at the end of my
row. Nicholas came up to me. His cheek twitched slightly. He gave me a
distracted look and smiled, but only with his eyes. ‘What’s your name?’
   I answered.
   ‘Are you Ukrainian?’
   ‘Yes, Your Majesty.’
   He looked me over with a brief, bored glance and moved on to my
neighbour. He stopped to ask each of us our names. A concert followed the
inspection. Since the tsar listened standing up, so did we.
   Nicholas made it quite clear that he was bored with the gala reception
and had no intention of wasting his time on some school concert. He kept
plucking impatiently at the glove he had removed from his right hand. The
concert was cut short. The school orchestra played ‘Glory, Glory to Our
Russian Tsar’, someone recited the ‘Song of Oleg’ and the choir sang a
cantata.
   The whole event was boring and pointless. The ministers yawned behind
the tsar’s back. It was too painful to watch the musicians, who were
quaking with fear, so we watched the ministers and the rest of the suite
instead. We were shocked by the difference between the tsar and the men
around him. Nicholas looked plain and even a bit awkward. He was lost
amid his large suite that flashed and gleamed in their silver and gold, in
their tall polished boots, epaulettes, sword knots, spurs, pelisses and medals.
Even when the courtiers stood still, a faint ringing could be heard from all
their regalia and weaponry.
   Nicholas listened to the concert with a stony expression and then left. He
was not satisfied. He had a score to settle with our school. Two days earlier
a former pupil named Bogrov had shot Minister Stolypin in the Opera
House, mortally wounding him. Of this I shall say more later.
   On our centenary it had been decided to promote the school from the
rank of a ‘gymnasium’ to that of a ‘lycée’. An edict to that effect had been
prepared. But after the shooting in the theatre it was no longer deemed
fitting for a gymnasium that had turned out political criminals to be granted
the special privileges and prestige of a lycée. And so instead our school
received nothing more than a new name – the Imperial Alexander
Gymnasium, in honour of Emperor Alexander I – and a new coat of arms
with a large ‘A’ and crown. The boys at Kiev’s other gymnasia liked to
make fun of our rather pompous new coat of arms, which led to more than a
few brawls. We boys in the top form refused to change our old school
badges for the new ones. The school officials objected, but we insisted that
we didn’t have the money for new badges and buckles. In the end, the
officials let the matter go. We just weren’t worth the effort considering we
would soon be leaving school.
   All sorts of festivities were arranged in honour of Nicholas’s visit to
Kiev. An ugly bronze statue of Alexander II was unveiled and even uglier
plaster statues of Saint Olga and Saints Cyril and Methodius. Military
manoeuvres were conducted on the outskirts of the city. Everywhere one
looked there were inaugurations, pageants, processions, ceremonial
illuminations. Flags hung from every house and building for the whole
week of the tsar’s stay.
   After a horse race, the boys and girls from all Kiev’s gymnasia were
paraded around the track. We kicked up a cloud of dust as we passed in
front of Nicholas. The setting sun was in our eyes. We couldn’t see a thing
and mixed up our ranks. A military band blew with all its might. Our school
distinguished itself by forgetting to acknowledge the tsar’s greeting. A full
general in the army galloped up and gave us a dressing down. His chestnut
steed had flattened its ears and stamped angrily as the general jerked at the
reins.
   A gala performance was planned for the Opera House which Nicholas
would be attending. Boys and girls in the top forms from a number of
schools, including ours, were also invited. We were led up a dark back
stairway to the gallery and locked in. We could not leave and go down to
the lower tiers. A few decent but rather brazen police officers were
stationed at the doors. When some pretty schoolgirl wanted to get out of the
gallery, they’d give each other a sly wink and let her pass.
   I was sitting in the back row and couldn’t see a thing. It was very hot. My
head practically touched the ceiling. Not until the interval was I able to
push my way up to the front. I leaned over the railing and looked out into
the hall. It was veiled in a light haze through which I made out flashes of
colour from the reflection of so many diamonds and jewels. The imperial
box was empty; Nicholas and the rest of the royal family had moved to the
avant-loge.
   Ministers and courtiers were standing by the railing separating the hall
from the orchestra pit. I stood looking down and listening to the murmur of
voices. The musicians in their black frock coats were sitting in front of their
music stands but none of them were bothering to tune their instruments as
usual. Suddenly, there was a loud crack. The musicians jumped to their feet.
There was another crack. I didn’t realise it was gunshots. The boys standing
beside me shouted: ‘Look! He fell right on the floor!’
   ‘Who?’
   ‘Stolypin. Right there, next to the railing!’
   I looked. The theatre was now strangely quiet. By the railing a tall man
with a bushy black beard and a sash over his shoulder was sitting on the
floor. He was grasping at the railing as if he wanted to grab hold and pull
himself up. The space around Stolypin was empty.
   A young man in a tail-coat was walking away from Stolypin towards the
exit. I couldn’t see his face from where I stood. All I noticed was that he
was in no hurry and walked calmly. Someone began to scream. There was a
thud. An officer had jumped out of the lower boxes and grabbed the young
man by the arm. They were immediately surrounded by a crowd.
   ‘Everyone out of the gallery!’ I heard one of the policemen say behind
me.
   They hurried us out into the corridor. The doors to the hall were closed.
We stood there with no idea what was happening. We could hear a muffled
hum coming from the hall. It died down, and then the orchestra played ‘God
Save the Tsar’.
   ‘He’s killed Stolypin,’ Fitsovsky whispered to me.
   ‘No talking! Leave the theatre at once!’ shouted a police officer.
   We went down the same dark set of stairs and out into the brightly lit
square. The square was empty. Lines of mounted police were moving the
crowds outside the theatre away and down into the side streets, farther and
farther back. The horses stamped their feet nervously, the sound echoing
down the streets and filling the square. A bugle sounded. An ambulance
carriage drove into the square at a swinging trot and stopped in front of the
theatre. A few medical orderlies jumped out and raced up the steps carrying
a stretcher.
   We began to leave the square. We walked slowly because we wanted to
see what would happen next. The police tried to move us along, but they
looked so confused themselves that we didn’t bother to pay them any
attention. We saw Stolypin carried out on a stretcher. The orderlies placed
him inside the carriage, and then they took off down Vladimirskaya Street
with a police escort galloping alongside.
   I returned home to Lukyanovka and told Grandmother and Gattenberger
that Stolypin had been murdered. Grandmother said it was never right to
shoot in a theatre since innocent people could be hurt. Gattenberger became
all excited, puffed agitatedly on his cigar, said that the scoundrel Stolypin
should have been killed sooner, and then raced off to the city centre for the
latest news. He returned after midnight and told us that straw had been laid
down all along Malaya Vladimirskaya Street, which is where the hospital
was that Stolypin had been taken to, and that the Black Hundreds were
calling for a pogrom against the Jews.
   ‘As if we haven’t had enough already!’ cried Grandmother, furious at the
thought of it.
   Gattenberger said that as long as the tsar was in Kiev there would be no
pogrom.
   ‘Are you going back into town?’ Grandmother asked me the next
morning.
   ‘Yes, to school.’
   ‘Why?’
   ‘We’re rehearsing for the tsar’s visit.’
   ‘Don’t go. You can tell them you were sick,’ Grandmother said. ‘What
nonsense! Doesn’t the tsar have anything better to do than show himself off
to a bunch of schoolboys?’
   I said that of course she was right.
   ‘Well, then, don’t go! Everyone’s rushing hither and thither in town all
because of this Nicholas. They’re wasting time on mere trifles, as if God
will somehow make it up to them. Stay at home. Perhaps you’ll have a
headache? Just sit and read in the garden. I’ll bake you a strutzel.’
(Grandmother never could say ‘strudel’ properly.) ‘I don’t understand how
people can go around wasting time like this. It makes no sense, it’s
pointless, especially in this weather!’
   I listened to Grandmother and skipped the rehearsal.
   The weather was indeed wonderful. The leaves on the apple trees had
turned pink and begun to dry out. Some of them had shrivelled up into little
funnels and were wrapped in cobwebs. Red and white asters were flowering
along the paths. Yellow butterflies fluttered among the trees. They settled in
clusters on the surfaces warmed by the sun – the stone steps of the
verandah, the metal watering can left out on the lawn. As though
diminished by the autumn, the sun travelled slowly overhead, taking a long
time to reach the tops of the walnut trees.
   I sat in the garden reading in Grandmother’s wicker chair. Now and then
a few notes of music reached me from the city. I put down my book and
looked at the path. It had been cut through the lawn’s thick grass and along
its sharp edges grew a fringe of velvety dark green moss. A small patch of
white stood out against the moss. For a second time a wood anemone had
sprouted here from a seed which had somehow been blown into the garden.
A white duck waddled in from the yard. Upon seeing me, it stopped,
quacked with displeasure and left, teetering from side to side as it went. My
presence had obviously upset the poor creature. Sparrows sat on the roof
preening themselves and craning their necks to see whether there wasn’t
something interesting in the garden. Finding nothing, they waited.
   Grandmother came out onto the verandah wrapped in a warm shawl and
tossed a handful of breadcrumbs. The sparrows flew down and began
hopping about on the ground like small grey balls.
   ‘Kostik,’ she said, ‘come in for dinner.’
   She was standing on the steps of the verandah. I stood up and went over
to her. From the house came the smell of apple strudel.
   ‘Now here’s a true royal feast for you!’ Grandmother said, looking out at
the garden. ‘But still folks feel the need to dream up all sorts of nonsense
for this Nicholas the Second!’
   She was right. The garden truly was a feast of sunlight and fresh warm
air.

                             OceanofPDF.com
35
Razgulyai Square



I travelled to visit Mama in Moscow over the Christmas holidays. As the
train was passing Bryansk, it snowed so hard nothing was visible outside
the window. I could only imagine behind the falling snow the familiar little
town with its streets carpeted in shiny white powder and Uncle Kolya’s
house with its glass-enclosed verandah. It was my first trip to Moscow. I
was excited to see Mama and to be leaving our southern, provincial Kiev
for the northern capital. With every hour the train moved ever deeper into
the white plains, slowly climbing to the edge of the dove-grey sky. There, in
the dark haze, it seemed to me that up ahead on the horizon the day was
merging with the eternal polar night.
   I was afraid of the Moscow winter. I didn’t have a warm coat, just
mittens and a hat with long ear flaps. Bells clanged in the cold air at the
stations, and felt boots crunched in the snow. The man travelling next to me
offered me some cured bear meat; it smelled of pine pitch.
   That night, somewhere beyond Sukhinichi, the train got stuck in heavy
snowdrifts. The wind howled in the metal ventilators. Guards, white and
shaggy with snow like woodsmen, ran with their lanterns up and down the
train, slamming the doors behind them with all their might. With each crash
of the doors I was startled awake. In the morning I went out onto the
platform at the end of the corridor. The icy air cut my face. Snow, driven by
the wind through the cracks around the door, lay in small, fluffy mounds.
With difficulty I managed to open the carriage door. The blizzard had died
down. The magnificent snow embraced the train up to the buffers. It was so
deep you could drown in it. Up above on top of the carriage a small blue
bird sat chirping, twisting its head this way and that. It was impossible to
tell where the white sky ended and the white earth began. It was so still I
could hear the water dripping from the engine.
   Dima met me in Moscow at Bryansky station. A stiff black moustache
bristled on his upper lip. He was wearing the uniform of the Technological
Institute. I was cold so we went to the buffet to have a tea. I was struck by
the station – a low wooden structure like some enormous tavern. Orange
sunlight fell on the counter, on the containers with their German silver lids,
the tables and blue potted palms, the steam rising from the teapots, the
muslin curtains. From beyond the windows etched with arrow-shaped
leaves of frost came the shouting of cabbies.
   We drank our tea with sugar cubes and were served crisp pastries
sprinkled with flour. Then we went out onto the steps. Steam rose from the
icy horses. The metal badges on the cabbies’ thick and heavily patched
coats caught the sun, dazzling our eyes. Pigeons were landing on the
manure-spattered snow.
   ‘Where to, Your Excellencies?’ the drivers shouted, smacking their lips
and shaking the reins. One of them drove up. He threw back a worn
wolfskin cover and we climbed into the narrow sleigh. We buried our feet in
the straw on the floor. I looked around in amazement. Could this really be
Moscow?
   ‘Razgulyai Square,’ Dima told the driver, ‘but be sure to go through the
Kremlin.’
   ‘As you wish. It’s all the same to me,’ the driver grunted.
   In an instant we found ourselves in Dorogomilovo just past the station in
a tangle of sledges, their mighty wooden yokes painted with flowers and
bedecked with little bells. The heavy wet breath of exhausted horses hit us
in the face, policemen with frozen moustaches sauntered past, overhead
hung the signs of a multitude of taverns and inns, and the peal of church
bells rang in the air.

                                      •

We drove over Borodino Bridge. The windows of the houses on the far side
of the river caught the fading light and burned with a dying golden glow.
The round clocks on the street corners showed only two o’clock. This was
all so strange, bewildering and wonderful.
   ‘Well,’ Dima asked, ‘how do you like Moscow?’
   ‘Very much.’
   ‘Just wait, there’s still plenty of marvels to feast your eyes on.’
    Beyond Arbatskaya Square we turned into a narrow street. At the end of
it I saw a hill, upon which sat ramparts and towers, the tops of green-roofed
palaces, and grey cathedrals. Everything was veiled in the reddish smoke of
the evening’s setting sun.
    ‘What’s that?’ I asked Dima, confused by it all.
    ‘You really don’t recognise it? That’s the Kremlin.’
    I sighed, uncontrollably. I was not prepared for this encounter with the
Kremlin. It rose up above this enormous city like a fortress built of pink
stone, ancient gold and silence. This was the Kremlin. This was Russia, the
history of my people. ‘Who so proud as not to bare his head before the
Kremlin’s holy gates . . .’1
    My eyes began to fill with tears. We drove into the Kremlin through the
Borovitsky Gate. I saw the Tsar Bell, the Tsar Cannon and the bell tower of
Ivan the Great as it disappeared into the evening sky. We three removed our
hats as the sleigh passed through the gates of the Spasskaya Tower, its
interior dimly lit by a flickering lamp. The clock chimed with grand
indifference over our heads.
    ‘And what’s that?’ I asked Dima, grabbing his arm as we exited.
    On the slope above the Moscow River there rose an intricate cluster of
cupolas, like brightly coloured heads of burdock.
    ‘Don’t you recognise St Basil’s Cathedral?’ Dima grinned.
    Bonfires burned on Red Square, around which cabbies and passers-by
stood warming themselves. Smoke hung over the square. On the walls I saw
posters from the Moscow Art Theatre with its flying seagull and other
posters with the words ‘Emile Verhaeren’2 in heavy black type.
    ‘What’s that?’ I asked Dima again.
    ‘Verhaeren is now in Moscow,’ he answered and laughed, looking at me.
I must have had a silly expression on my face. There were still plenty of
marvels awaiting me.
    It was dark by the time we got to Razgulyai Square. Our sleigh stopped
in front of a two-storey house with thick walls. We climbed a steep
staircase. Dima rang the bell, and Mama flung open the door. Behind her
stood Galya, craning her neck to see me on the dark landing. Mama
embraced me and started to cry. She’d gone completely grey since I last saw
her.
    ‘My Lord,’ she said, ‘you’re all grown up! You look just like your father!
Oh Lord, just like him!’
   Galya was now almost blind. She led me to a lamp in the flat and
examined me for a long time. From her strained expression I could tell she
couldn’t see me at all; still she kept insisting that I had not changed in the
slightest. The furnishings were meagre and unfamiliar. But I did recognise a
few things from my childhood – Mama’s jewellery box, an antique bronze
alarm clock and a photograph of my father taken as a young man. The
photograph hung on the wall over Mama’s bed.
   Mama was upset that dinner still wasn’t ready and went off to the
kitchen. Galya, as usual, began to ask me silly questions – how’s the
weather in Kiev, why was the train delayed, does Grandmother Viktoria
Ivanovna still drink coffee for breakfast? Dima was silent. I felt that our
lives these past two years had been so fraught and difficult that I didn’t
know what to say. Then I realised there was at this point no need to bring up
anything difficult or important. During these two years our lives had gone
in completely different directions. There was no way I could say all I
wanted to in the ten days I was to be in Moscow. And so I said nothing
about my life – not to Mama, Dima or Galya. With a faint nostalgia my
thoughts turned to my grandmother and my room on Lukyanovka. It
seemed that my real life was back there. Everything here seemed strange –
Dima’s institute, the old, gloomy two-room flat, Galya’s boring questions.
Only Mama’s eyes remained the same. But Mama now worried over trifles
that she never would have given any thought to before.
   I was waiting for her to ask me about my plans, but it was not until we’d
sat down to dinner that she asked in a casual way: ‘What will you do after
you leave school?’
   ‘Go to university,’ I replied.
   After dinner Mama took some grey theatre tickets with seagulls printed
on them out of her jewellery box. ‘These are for you,’ she said.
   They were tickets to The Man Who Was Dead and Three Sisters at the Art
Theatre. She had queued outside the theatre all night long in the freezing
cold to buy them. Overjoyed, I kissed her, and she smiled and said how
much she had enjoyed standing out all night in a crowd of students. She
hadn’t had that much fun in a long time. Three Sisters was on that evening,
and Dima and I left for the theatre straight after dinner. We rode in a cold
tram to Teatralnaya Square. The electrical cables crackled and shot blue
sparks.
   Fresh snow sparkled on the square. Flakes seemed to be suspended in the
night air, hovering in the light of the street lamps. The shop windows of
Muir and Mirrielees cast elongated patches of light onto the pavement. In
one of the windows stood a Christmas tree, all lit up and decorated with
gold and silver paper chains, which hung down to the floor. We crossed
Teatralnaya Square into Kamergersky Lane before entering the modest-
looking theatre. The floors were covered in heavy grey cloth. People were
moving without making a sound. A hot breeze blew from the radiators. The
brown curtain emblazoned with a seagull rippled slightly. Everything was at
once austere yet festive.
   My cheeks burned and my eyes, I guess, sparkled such that the theatre-
goers around us were looking at me with smiles on their faces. Dima said:
‘Pull yourself together or you won’t hear or see a thing.’ I ached for the
characters who suffered so in Chekhov’s play. Yet at the same time, I was
filled with a feeling of fresh excitement, a feeling that flowed from being in
the presence of the arts. All the sad and miserable things I had seen at
Razgulyai now struck me as temporary and unimportant. Despite all our
poverty, insults and failures, no one could extinguish the light coming from
that mysterious world of the arts. No one could take this treasure from me.
And no one had the key to it but myself. I spent all ten days in Moscow in
this state. Mama kept looking at me and repeating that I had become just
like my father.
   ‘It’s clear to me,’ she finally said, ‘there’s little chance of you becoming a
decent man.’ She fell silent and then added: ‘No, you’ll never be of much
help to us, or even to yourself. Not with your passions, with your fantasies!
Not with your frivolous approach to everything!’
   I was silent. Mama pulled me towards her and gave me a kiss. ‘Well, so
be it! I just want you to be happy. Nothing else matters.’
   ‘But I am happy,’ I said. ‘Please don’t worry about me. I’ve lived on my
own for two years now. And I have no problem continuing to do so.’
   Mama had started to wear glasses. The frame had broken and was held
together by tape. She fiddled with the tape for a long while, then took off
her glasses and looked at me carefully.
   ‘How cold our family has become,’ she sighed. ‘And secretive. It’s all
because we’re poor. You’ve come all this way and haven’t said a word
about yourself. And I don’t say anything either. I just keep putting it off.
But we really need to talk.’
   ‘Well, all right, then. Only don’t upset yourself.’
   ‘Galya is blind!’ Mama said. She was quiet a long time. ‘And now she’s
losing her hearing. She wouldn’t last a week without me. You have no idea
the amount of care she needs. She requires all the strength I have. God
alone knows how much I love you three – you, Dima and Galya – but I
simply can’t be there for all of you.’
   I told her that I understood everything and that very soon I’d be able to
help her and Galya. I just had to finish school first. I no longer had any
intention, as before, of coming back to live with Mama. But I felt sorry for
her, I loved her, and I didn’t want her to torment herself on my behalf. I
calmed her down and then, with a lightened heart, I left to visit the
Tretyakov Gallery.
   I felt like a guest in my own family. The contrast between Moscow, with
its brilliant snow and icy winter sky, its theatres, museums and church bells,
and the two cold rooms on Razgulyai, with their pinched and dreary life,
was too big. It bewildered me to see Dima looking so perfectly content with
his life – his institute and chosen profession that was so alien to me. It was
with the same bewilderment that I noticed how Dima’s room was devoid of
books, except for a few textbooks and mimeographed lecture notes. As for
Galya, her blindness meant her days were spent in cautious preoccupation
with various insignificant tasks. She had to do everything by touch. Time
for her had stopped three years ago when she started to go blind. Now she
lived in her memories, which were trivial and monotonous. The range of
these memories grew ever smaller – Galya had begun to forget a great deal.
Sometimes she just sat in silence with her hands folded in her lap. Once in a
while Mama found some time in the evening to read a bit to Galya, usually
from Goncharov or Turgenev. Then Galya would question her about every
last detail from the story she had just heard in the hope of remembering it
all. Mama patiently answered her questions.
   I left for the Tretyakov Gallery. There was hardly anyone there. It seemed
to me as if the still winter had somehow transported the gallery from the
city to the quiet Moscow suburbs – not a single sound from outside could
be heard. Some old women – guardians of these masterpieces – sat dozing
in their chairs. I stood looking for a long time at Nesterov’s The Vision of
Bartholomew3 with its thin birch trees as white as candles and its grass
reaching up to the sky with faith and hope. I was moved by the painting’s
touching and undemanding beauty.
   On a couch sat a stout white-haired woman in black examining with a
lorgnette the painting from across the room. Next to her sat a young woman
with auburn plaits. I stood off to the side so as not to block her view. The
white-haired woman turned and said to me: ‘What do you think, Kostik,
doesn’t it remind you of the hills beyond the park at Rëvny?’ Startled, I
looked at her confusedly. She gazed at me with a smile: ‘You young people
are so unobservant!’ she said. ‘Have you really already forgotten us
Karelins – Lyuba, Sasha and me? We met at Rëvny, true it was some years
ago.’
   I blushed and said hello. Now I recognised the white-haired lady – Maria
Trofimovna Karelina. But I did not recognise Lyuba at first. She had grown
up, and no longer wore the black ribbons in her plaits.
   ‘Have a seat,’ said Maria Trofimovna. ‘How you’ve grown! I suppose I
shouldn’t be calling you Kostik anymore. Do tell us how you ended up
here. And together we’ll reminisce about Rëvny. Oh, what a place, what a
place! We really must go back this summer.’
   I told her about myself. Maria Trofimovna informed me that she and
Sasha were still living in Orël. Lyuba had finished school and enrolled at
the Moscow College of Painting and Sculpture. Maria Trofimovna and
Sasha had come to visit her in Moscow over the Christmas holidays.
   ‘And where is Sasha?’ I asked.
   ‘She stayed back at the hotel. She has a sore throat.’
   Lyuba kept sneaking glances at me the whole time. We left together. I
walked the Karelins back to the Loskutnaya Hotel. They insisted I come up
to warm myself and have a cup of coffee. The large two-room suite was
dark with heavy curtains and carpets. Sasha greeted me like an old friend
and immediately began to ask about Gleb Afanasiev. As far as I knew Gleb
was still at school in Bryansk. Sasha had a ribbon tied around her neck like
a kitten. She took me by the hand: ‘Come! I’m going to show you Lyuba’s
pictures.’ She began to pull me into the other room, but Lyuba grabbed my
other hand and pulled me back.
   ‘Nonsense!’ she said, blushing. ‘You’ll look at them later. We’ll see you
again, won’t we?’
   ‘I don’t know,’ I hesitated.
   ‘He’s going to spend New Year’s Eve with us!’ Sasha cried. ‘At Lyuba’s
studio on Kislovka. You wouldn’t believe the bohemians who gather there.
You have no idea, Kostik! Knights of the canvas and palette. There’s one
painter – she’s straight out of a French novel. You’re bound to fall in love
with her at first sight. She goes about in a black satin dress – frou-frou-frou!
– and her perfume, oh her perfume! It’s called Sorrow of the Tuberose!’
   ‘Oh Lord, what rubbish you talk,’ said Lyuba. ‘Now I understand why
your throat hurts all the time.’
   ‘I have the delicate throat of a nightingale,’ said Sasha, making a sad
face. ‘It’s not suited to these harsh Russian winters.’
   ‘But seriously, won’t you join us for New Year?’ Lyuba asked.
   ‘I’ll be at home. It’s a family tradition.’
   ‘Fine, greet the New Year at home and then come to Lyuba’s,’ Maria
Trofimovna said firmly. ‘They’ll be up having fun and being silly all night
long.’
   I agreed to come. Then we had our coffee. Sasha dropped four lumps of
sugar into my cup. It was undrinkable. Maria Trofimovna scolded her.
Lyuba sat quietly, staring at the floor.
   ‘Why are you sitting there like Vasilisa the Beautiful?’ asked Sasha.
‘She’s become quite the beauty, hasn’t she, Kostik? Look at her. Not like
her little sister, the Ugly Duckling.’
   ‘Stop it once and for all, you chatterbox!’ Lyuba pushed away her cup
and jumped up from the table. I looked at Lyuba. Blue sparks flashed in her
eyes. She truly was quite beautiful.
   I left. At home I told Mama that I’d seen the Karelins and they’d invited
me to spend New Year’s Eve with them. Mama was happy. ‘You must go. I
fear you’ve been bored here in Moscow. They’re nice people and very
cultured.’
   Culture was Mama’s yardstick for judging people. If she respected
someone she would always say: ‘Now there’s a truly cultured person!’
   New Year’s Eve was still two days away. These were marvellous days –
white hoar-frost covered everything and a silver mist hung in the air. I went
skating at the rink in the Zoological Garden. The ice there was thick and
black, not like back in Kiev. The attendants swept it with enormous brooms.
I raced a bearded man in a black sheepskin hat around the rink and won. He
reminded me of the artist I had seen at the estate near Smela where I’d once
been with Aunt Nadya. Mama kept saying she was going to take me to Aunt
Nadya’s grave at Vagankovo cemetery but she never did. She told me that
her grave was still decorated with porcelain roses. They had faded but
hadn’t broken.
   I went to see The Man Who Was Dead at the Moscow Art Theatre and I
liked it better than Three Sisters. Up on stage was the real Moscow, with its
courtroom and trial, its Gypsies and their songs. In the December snow of
Moscow I recalled times past for some unknown reason – Alushta, Lena,
and how she had called to me: ‘Go on! It’s just a load of nonsense!’ All
these years I had kept meaning to write to her, but I never did. Now I was
certain she had forgotten me.
   I recalled Lena and was struck by the thought of how many people had
gone from my life never to return. Not just Lena, but Aunt Nadya, my
beekeeping grandfather, my father, Uncle Yuzia and so many others. It
seemed so strange and sad, and although I was only eighteen, I felt as if I
had already experienced a great deal. I had loved those people. Every one of
them had taken a little piece of my love with them when they left. I couldn’t
help but think that this had made me just a bit poorer. That’s what I thought
at the time, but these thoughts didn’t rob me of my love of life, which grew
stronger with each passing year. Since many people had gone out of my life
forever or for a long time, I felt that meeting the Karelins – and I had
completely forgotten about them – held some special meaning.
   I greeted the New Year at home. Mama baked biscuits and Dima bought
hors d’oeuvres, cakes and wine. At eleven o’clock Dima left. Mama told me
he’d gone to fetch his fiancée, Margarita. Mama assured me she was a
remarkable girl and she could not wish for a better wife for Dima. Not
wanting to hurt Mama’s feelings, I feigned pleasant surprise even though I
didn’t like her name or the fact that she came from a family of state
officials. I helped Mama set the table. The room smelled of scorched hair.
Galya had burned off a long curl doing her hair with a hot iron. She was
very upset and I did all I could to cheer her up. We lit the candles. Mama
put the bronze alarm clock on the table, and I set it for twelve o’clock.
   I got out the presents I had brought from Kiev – for Mama, grey cloth to
make a new dress, for Galya, a pair of slippers, for Dima, a large box of
drawing instruments. The box was exquisite and had belonged to Borya, but
I had convinced him to give it up. Mama was so pleased at the presents she
even blushed.
   A few minutes before midnight Dima returned with a tall, pale girl. She
had a long, sad face and wore an ill-fitting lilac dress with a yellow sash. A
lace kerchief was pinned to her bodice. She blushed the entire time and kept
helping herself to pieces of cake from the serving plate with her fork. Galya
immediately began asking her questions about her thoughts on proper child
rearing. The girl responded reluctantly, looking over at Dima, who sat there
with an uncomfortable smile on his face.
   The bronze clock suddenly rang, putting an end to Galya’s talk. We
raised our glasses of wine and wished each other Happy New Year. It was
obvious Mama really wanted Margarita to like us. At the same time, she
watched closely how Margarita looked at Dima, as if she were trying to
gauge whether there was enough love in the girl’s glances. I talked about
this and that and did my best to show everyone how much fun I was having,
all the while stealing glances at the clock.
   Mama drank her wine and began to relax. She told Margarita about
Easters with our grandmother back in Cherkassy and about how fine and
happy our lives in Kiev had once been. It was as if she couldn’t even
believe it herself. ‘Isn’t that right, Kostik? Wasn’t that how it was?’ I kept
telling her that she was right. That’s just how it had been. At half past one I
excused myself and got up to leave. Mama showed me out. She asked me
conspiratorially what I thought of Margarita. I knew telling her the truth
would only cause her undue pain. So I said Margarita was a charming girl
and I was very happy for Dima.
   ‘Well, let’s hope it all works out!’ she whispered. ‘It seems to me that
Margarita likes Galya too.’
   I went out into Basmannaya Street, stopped and took a deep breath of the
cold air. Lights burned in the windows of the houses up and down the street.
I waved down a cabbie and drove off towards Kislovka. The entire way the
man swore at his horse.
   Sasha opened the door at Kislovka. She was wearing a bright new ribbon
around her neck. Some little girls followed by a handsome old man in a
student’s uniform came running into the front hall. There was no sign of
Lyuba. Laughing, the little girls removed my hat and coat and the old man
began to sing in a clear voice: ‘Three young goddesses began to quarrel,
upon a hill as evening fell.’
   ‘His eyes! His eyes!’ the girls shouted.
   Sasha covered my eyes with her hands. The smell of her hair, her
perfume and the touch of her fingers gently pressing against my eyes
combined to take my breath away. I was taken by the hands and led away. I
sensed some doors opening in front of me and then felt a rush of warm air
hit me in the face. The room fell quiet and then a woman’s voice issued a
stern order: ‘Swear!’
   ‘Swear what?’ I asked.
   ‘That tonight you shall forget everything but gaiety.’
   Sasha’s fingers began to hurt my eyes.
   ‘I swear!’
   ‘And now swear the oath of allegiance!’
   ‘To whom?’
   ‘To her who has been chosen queen of our fête.’
   ‘Swear,’ Sasha whispered, tickling my ear with her breath.
   ‘I swear.’
   ‘As a sign of obedience, kiss the Queen’s hand, such is the tradition of all
knights,’ said the voice, suppressing a laugh. ‘Sasha, now take your big
paws off him!’
   Sasha removed her hands. I beheld a brightly lit room crowded with
paintings. A skinny man in a velvet jacket was lying in the pose of Vrubel’s
Demon Downcast on top of a piano. His arms were twisted over his head,
and he gazed at me with doleful eyes. A pug-nosed youth pounded out a
chord on the keyboard. The girls all took a step back, and there before me
was Lyuba. She was sitting in an armchair on a round table. She wore a
flowing dress of white silk that pooled at her feet. Her bare arms hung down
at her side, and in her right hand she held a fan of black ostrich feathers.
Lyuba looked at me, trying not to laugh. I approached and kissed her
outstretched hand. The old man dressed as a student gave me a glass of
champagne. It was ice cold. I drank it down in one gulp.
   Lyuba rose to her feet. I helped her down off the table. She took the edge
of her long dress in one hand, bowed to me and asked: ‘We didn’t frighten
you with our nonsense, did we? Why did he give you cold champagne? You
need something warm. I think we still have some mulled wine.’
   I was dragged to a table and was just being served when they forgot all
about this and, with a laugh, pushed the table, and me with it, into the
corner to make room for dancing. The young man at the piano struck up a
waltz. The Demon jumped off the piano and began to dance with Lyuba.
Leaning back in his arms and covering her face with the black fan, she flew
about the room. Every time she passed by me, she smiled from under her
fan, one hand holding the train of her dress. The old man was dancing with
the woman Sasha called the heroine of a French novel. She was letting out a
sinister laugh. Sasha pulled me up from the table and we began to dance.
She was so thin I feared she might break in two.
   ‘Just don’t dance with Lyuba,’ she said.
   ‘Why?’
   ‘She’s stuck up!’
   Once we had finished dancing, the Demon downed all the remaining
wine in the bottles and was soon drunk. ‘I thirst for summer!’ he screamed.
‘Enough of the icicles! Give me rain!’
   No one was paying him any attention, and he disappeared. The old man
sat down at the piano and began to sing in a heart-breaking voice: ‘My
distant friend, do you know why I weep . . .’4
   As soon as he had finished, we suddenly heard the sound of rain, a heavy
and fresh downpour, from somewhere nearby. Startled, we fell silent, and
then raced out into the hall and straight to the bathroom. The Demon was
standing in the bathtub in his raincoat and galoshes, a black umbrella in his
hand, while a powerful stream of water rained down on him from the
shower. ‘Gold! It’s raining gold straight from heaven!’ he yelled.
   We turned off the shower and pulled the Demon out of the bath. The
night’s commotion dragged on, and I too found myself laughing, reciting
poetry and blathering. I finally came to my senses when Lyuba extinguished
the chandelier and the bluish haze of dawn crept into the room. We all fell
silent. As the blue morning light mixed with the fire of the table lamp, faces
became smudgy and beautiful.
   ‘This is the best time after all-night parties,’ said the old man. ‘Now we
can leisurely sip our wine and talk about this and that. I love the dawn. It
rinses the soul.’
   The Demon hadn’t sobered up yet. ‘No rinsing!’ he shouted. ‘I don’t care
to hear anyone, no matter who, rinsing his soul. A lot of Dostoevskian
nonsense. Light consists of seven colours. I bow down before them. And I
don’t give a damn about anything else!’
   We were all quiet for a long time, caught in a dreamy drowsiness. Lyuba
was sitting next to me. ‘Everything’s swimming in front of my eyes,’ she
said. ‘And it’s all bathed in blue . . . And I have no intention of going to
sleep.’
   ‘Catharsis!’ the old man pronounced with great importance. ‘The
cleansing of the soul from tragedy.’
   ‘I don’t know about that,’ Lyuba replied. Her mind wandered. The blue
of the morning reflected in her eyes.
   ‘You’re tired,’ I said.
   ‘No. It’s just that I feel so wonderful.’
   ‘Is it true you’ll be in Rëvny this summer?’
   ‘Yes,’ she said. ‘Are you coming?’
   ‘Yes, if Uncle Kolya will be there.’
   ‘Only “if”?’ Lyuba asked slyly.
   Everyone began to get up and say their goodbyes. I was the last to leave.
I had to see Sasha back to the Loskutnaya Hotel, but she was waiting for
her throat to cool after a scalding cup of tea. Out in the street fashionable
women and young men – we assumed they must be actors – were having a
snowball fight. The snow was sprinkled with brightly coloured confetti. The
sun was up by now, dissolving the night fog with its blurry fire.
   After this exotic night I was ashamed to return to our wretched flat on
Razgulyai Square and its stench of paraffin. But the thought lasted only a
moment, and then my soul lifted again, as if all of life – the snow, the
sunlight and Lyuba’s hand, which had grasped mine for an instant upon
parting – had been imperceptibly transformed into a gentle piece of music.
   Two days later I left Moscow. Mama, hunched and wearing a warm
shawl, saw me to the station. Dima went with Margarita that evening to the
theatre. Galya kept worrying that I’d miss my train. On the platform, Mama
said: ‘Don’t be angry. I misspoke when I said you’re like your father. I
know you’re a good boy.’
   The train departed the station. It was evening. I stood by the window for
a long time looking out on the lights of Moscow. Perhaps, I thought, one of
them was the light from Lyuba’s room.


1   From ‘Moscow’ (1840) by Fëdor Glinka (1786–1880).
2   Emile Verhaeren (1855–1916), Belgian Symbolist poet.
3 Painting from 1890 by Mikhail Nesterov (1862–1942) depicting a scene
from the life of Sergei Radonezhsky (born Bartholomew), also Sergius of
Radonezh, the great fourteenth-century holy man.
4 The opening line of Afanasy Fet’s verse epistle ‘A. L. Brzhevskaya’
(1879).

                          OceanofPDF.com
36
A Tale about Nothing



The thaw started in February. A thick fog kept settling over Kiev, only to
be chased away by a warm wind. Lukyanovka smelled of melting snow.
And of wood bark. It blew in on the wind from beyond the Dnieper, near
Chernigov, where the forests were darkening with the approach of spring.
   Water dripped from the roof and the melting icicles, and only at night,
and even then not often, did the wind tear away the clouds, so that the
puddles froze and the stars came out. You could see them only in the
outskirts of the city where we lived. In town there was too much light from
the houses and street lamps for anyone to even suspect their presence.
Grandmother’s cottage was warm and cosy on the raw February nights. The
electric lights glowed inside behind the closed shutters, while the wind
blustered in the empty garden.
   I had begun writing a new story – about Polesia and the Old Men of
Mogilëv. I couldn’t stop tinkering with it, and the more I tinkered, the more
I drained the life out of the story. It ended up limp and stale. Nevertheless, I
finally finished the story and took it over to the editors of Lights. Their
office was on Fundukleevskaya Street in a small room facing the yard. A
cheery-looking and rather tubby little man was preparing his tea and slicing
sausage on a pile of galleys. He wasn’t surprised in the least by the
appearance of a schoolboy with a manuscript. He took the story, quickly
glanced at the ending, and said that he liked it but that I’d have to wait for
the editor. ‘Did you use your real surname?’ he asked.
   ‘Yes.’
   ‘Bad idea. We’re a left-wing magazine. And you’re just a schoolboy.
There could be trouble. Think up a pseudonym.’
   I obediently crossed out my name on the last page and wrote down
‘Balagin’ instead.
   ‘That’ll do!’ he said approvingly.
   A thin man with a sallow complexion, a tangled beard and sunken
piercing eyes walked into the room. He had trouble taking off his large
snow boots, and then began cursing and coughing as he unwound his long
scarf.
   ‘Here’s the editor,’ said the tubby fellow, who stopped peeling the
sausage and pointed at the newcomer with his penknife.
   Without bothering to even glance in my direction, the editor went over to
his desk, sat down, stretched out a long arm and then said in a flat and
terrifying voice: ‘Give it here!’
   I placed the manuscript in his outstretched hand.
   ‘Are you aware that rejected manuscripts are not returned?’ the editor
asked.
   ‘Yes.’
   ‘Magnificent!’ he grumbled. ‘Come back in an hour. I’ll have an answer
for you.’
   The tubby man winked and gave me a smile. I left discouraged and
wandered up and down Kreshchatik for a long while before going to the
library, where I ran into Fitsovsky. He had just picked up a volume of Ibsen
and began to berate me for not reading more of him. He insisted that Ibsen’s
Ghosts was the greatest work of literature in the world. We left the library
together. It was still too early to return to the editorial office. We ducked
into a dark courtyard to smoke. We were forbidden to smoke and didn’t
want to be seen out on the street by a teacher or any of the school officials.
   Fitsovsky walked with me to the office and said he would wait outside.
He wanted to find out the editor’s decision, but I asked him to leave. I was
terrified and didn’t want Fitsovsky to see me if they rejected my story. I
went in. The editor just looked at me closely for a while without saying a
word. I didn’t say a word either. I could feel my face becoming warm and
damp. I was aware that I was blushing terribly.
   ‘May I have my manuscript back?’ I asked.
   ‘Your manuscript?’ the editor said and began choking with laughter. ‘Yes,
of course, please, here you are. You can have it back and then toss it in the
fire. It’s just that I want to publish your story. Can you imagine, I actually
liked it.’
   ‘I’m sorry, I didn’t realise,’ I mumbled.
   ‘Such a hot-tempered young man! Since you’re going to be a writer,
please show a little patience. Come and pick up your honorarium on
Wednesday,’ he said icily, before changing his tone: ‘And do me the favour
of bringing in whatever you write next.’
   I dashed out of the office. Fitsovsky was standing by the front gate. He
hadn’t left as I had told him to.
   ‘Well?’ he asked nervously. ‘Did they accept it?’
   ‘Yes, they did.’
   ‘Let’s go to my place!’ he said. ‘I’ve got a bottle of muscatel and some
pickled apples. We must celebrate!’
   We drank the bottle of muscatel, and I didn’t get home until very late,
after the trams had stopped running. I walked along the empty streets. All
the lights were out. Had I encountered a beggar I would have given him the
coat off my back or done something else just as rash. But the only thing I
met was a white dog. It was cold and wet, sitting by a fence. I dug around in
my pockets but didn’t find anything to give it. I patted it and then walked
off. The dog got up and followed me. I talked to the dog all the way home.
It kept jumping up and nipping at my coat sleeve, as if to show me it
understood.
   ‘Listen,’ I said and stopped. The dog’s ears went up. There was a rustling
sound coming from the gardens along the street, as if last year’s leaves were
being stirred. ‘Do you know what that means?’ I asked. ‘That’s the sound of
spring. And after that it’ll soon be summer. That’s when I’ll be leaving. And
maybe then I’ll meet a woman, perhaps the finest woman in the world.’
   The dog jumped and snapped at my sleeve, and we walked on.
   Every window was dark. The city slept. How could it? I thought to
myself. No one should be sleeping on such a splendid night. Everyone
ought to be up and outside to witness the dark passage of these clouds and
to listen to the soft gurgle of the melting snow and the muffled dripping of
water within the hollowed snowdrifts.
   I don’t know how I got home. Grandmother was asleep. The dog
followed me quietly into my room. Supper, long gone cold, was waiting for
me on the table. I fed the dog a bit of bread and meat and made it a bed in
the corner by the stove. It lay down and fell fast asleep. Now and then it
wagged its tail without waking, as if in gratitude. Grandmother wasn’t
angry when she saw the dog in the morning. She felt sorry for it, called it
Cadeau, started feeding it, and in the end the dog stayed with her for good.
   Spring grew closer with each day. Along with it came our final
examinations. To pass we had to revise everything we had ever learned in
school. This was difficult, especially in springtime.
   Uncle Kolya arrived from Bryansk at the end of the Easter holidays to
visit Grandmother for a few days. He stayed with me in my room. Aunt
Vera was offended he didn’t live with her family in the big house, but he
brushed the matter off with a joke. Lying in our beds in the evening, Uncle
Kolya and I talked and laughed. When she overheard us, Grandmother got
up out of bed, dressed and came and sat with us until late in the night.
   One evening Uncle Kolya and I attended another of Aunt Vera’s stuffy
command supper parties. She gathered around her what Grandmother called
a collection of ‘monstres et créatures’. I felt a particular dislike for the
noted Kievan oculist Dumitrashko, a small man with a squeaky voice, a
wavy beard and flowing locks of golden hair that pooled over the collar of
his black frock coat. As soon as he arrived, poison began to fill the air.
Rubbing his puffy hands, Dumitrashko would immediately begin spouting
all sorts of nasty filth about the intelligentsia. Aunt Vera’s husband, a
businessman with a dark complexion and a face covered in blackheads,
always egged him on. And then there was Piotukh, a retired general whose
arrival no one ever seemed to notice. He came with his three daughters, all
of them old maids, and talked almost exclusively about the price of
firewood, which he bought and sold on the side.
   Aunt Vera tried to be a witty hostess but had little success. She began
nearly every sentence with her beloved words ‘Do keep in mind’. ‘Do keep
in mind,’ she would say, ‘Madame Bashinskaya wears only lilac dresses’ or
‘Do keep in mind, the apples in this pie come from my own garden.’ Her
attempts to start a conversation never went anywhere.
   She forced her daughter Nadya to play the piano and sing as the
evening’s entertainment. Terrified by the intense stares the general’s
daughters gave her, Nadya would pick away hesitantly at the piano as she
tried to sing in her weak, shaky voice the once fashionable romance ‘The
Swan’: ‘The creek sleeps, silent is the glassy water . . .’ Her German music
teacher sat quietly, her eyes anxiously watching Nadya. The woman had a
large and unusually thin nose such that when she sat next to a bright lamp,
the light shone through it. Above this nose rose a tall pile of hair on her
head held in place by a garland of flowers.
   After supper Uncle Kolya and I returned to the cottage. ‘Ugh!’ he said
with a deep exhale. ‘That was just awful!’ In order to forget what we had
just sat through and to try to cheer ourselves up, Uncle Kolya invited
Gattenberger over to Grandmother’s room for a small concert. He sang
Polish folk songs for her accompanied by Gattenberger on the cello:

       O Vistula, so blue,
       Like some wondrous flower.
       To foreign lands you flow, such is your power,
       Your path so long and so true!

   Grandmother listened, her hands folded in her lap. Her head shook ever
so slightly, and tears clouded her eyes. Poland was far, far away.
Grandmother knew she would never again see the Niemen or the Vistula or
Warsaw. Walking had become difficult for her, and she had even stopped
going to church.
   The day he left Uncle Kolya told me that he planned to return to Rëvny
next summer and made me promise to come and join him. I was only too
happy to say yes.
   Once I knew I would be going back to Rëvny, everything looked
different. I even began to believe that I would have no trouble passing my
final examinations. The promise of happier days was a long way off,
however, and so there was nothing I could do but wait. But then, sometimes
it’s the mere anticipation of happy days – and not the days themselves – that
is the most enjoyable part. At the time I knew nothing about this strange
quality of life, but I would become convinced of it later.

                             OceanofPDF.com
37
Leaving School



Final examinations began at the end of May and lasted for an entire month.
The rest of the school had already been let out for the summer holidays. Our
form alone turned up every morning to the cool, empty gymnasium, which
seemed to be resting after the commotion of the winter months. Our
footsteps echoed from floor to floor. The windows in the Assembly Hall,
where the examinations were held, had been opened. Dandelion seeds
floated around the room in the sunlight like little blinking white lights.
   We were required to take the examinations in our dress uniforms. The
stiff silver-braided collars scratched our necks. We sat in the garden under
the chestnut trees, our collars unbuttoned, waiting our turn. The
examinations frightened us, and we were sad to be leaving school. We had
grown used to it. The future looked unclear and troubling, mainly because
we would inevitably lose touch with each other. Our loyal, happy family
was being destroyed. We called a meeting in the garden before the first
examination. Every pupil was invited, except for the Jews. They were not
even supposed to know about the meeting. We agreed that the best Russian
and Polish pupils should make certain to get a mark of four or lower in at
least one subject so none of us would win a gold medal. We had decided
that all the gold medals should go to the Jews because without them they
would not be admitted to university. We swore to keep this a secret. To our
credit, we never spoke of it, neither then, nor later once at university. I am
breaking this vow only because almost none of my schoolmates are still
alive. Most of them perished in the great wars that my generation had to
face. Only a handful of us have survived.
   There was a second meeting. This was to decide which among us ought
to help some of the girls from the Mariinskaya Girls’ Gymnasium write
their compositions. I don’t know why, but they took the written Russian
literature examination together with us. Stanishevsky was in charge of the
negotiations with the girls. He brought back a list of the girls needing help.
There were six names on it.
   I was told to help a girl named Bogushevich. I had never seen or even
heard of her. We wrote our compositions in the Assembly Hall. Everyone
sat at their own separate desk – boys to the left, girls to the right. Monitors
patrolled the wide aisle between us to see that we didn’t pass back and forth
any notes, cribs or other suspicious objects. Each of the six girls needing
our help took a seat along the aisle. I tried to guess which one was
Bogushevich. Her name suggested a plump Ukrainian. One of the girls was
indeed plump, with heavy plaits. I decided this had to be her.
   The director walked in. We rose. With a loud rip, he tore open a heavy
sealed envelope and removed a sheet of paper with the composition theme
sent from the District Department of Education. Next, he took a piece of
chalk and carefully began to write on the blackboard: ‘True education
combines moral and intellectual development.’ A groan of horror swept
over the hall – this was a deadly theme. I had no time to waste. I
immediately set to drafting a synopsis for Bogushevich on a narrow strip of
paper.
   We were permitted to smoke during final examinations, but only one
pupil at a time could go to the smoking room at the end of the corridor. The
monitor there was the decrepit old Proctor Kazimir, the same one who had
taken me to my preparatory form on the very first day. On the way down
the corridor, I rolled the scrap of paper into a tube and stuck it into the
hollow mouthpiece of my cigarette. After smoking the cigarette, I left the
stub in a pre-arranged place on the windowsill. Kazimir didn’t notice a
thing. He just sat there, chewing on his sandwich.
   My job was done. Next up was Littauer. He smoked his cigarette, left the
stub on the sill, removed my crib, and then dropped it on Bogushevich’s
desk as he walked down the aisle. After him went Stanishevsky, Régamé
and two others. Their job was harder than mine, requiring both sharp eyes
and quick hands.
   I had already started writing my composition when Littauer returned to
the hall. I kept an eye on him. I wanted to see who he gave the crib to, and
how, but he did it so fast I didn’t even notice. Only after I saw one of the
girls begin feverishly writing did I know the operation had been a success
and Bogushevich had been saved. It wasn’t the girl with the plaits, but a
different one. All I could see was her thin back, covered with a white-
striped pinafore, and the reddish curls around her neck.
   We had four hours to write our composition. Most of us finished early.
Only the girls were still sitting there agonising over their desks. We went
out into the garden. The trees were full of birds, all of them singing; it
seemed as if they had come from every part of Kiev. A fight almost broke
out between Littauer and Stanishevsky. Littauer said that Stanishevsky had
done a poor job planning the operation. Stanishevsky was livid. Basking in
its success, he had expected our praise, not criticism.
   ‘What was wrong with it?’ he asked Littauer in a bullying tone that
promised nothing good.
   ‘Namely, that there was no damned reason to know the girls’ names. Six
girls, six cribs. It didn’t matter who got which one. Why did I need to know
whether I’m writing for Bogushevich or Yavorskaya? It’s all the same to
me! It only complicated matters when it came time to slip them the cribs.’
   ‘Oh my God!’ Stanishevsky shook his head in disbelief. ‘You’re a true
cretin! You have no imagination whatsoever. I did that intentionally.’
   ‘Why?’
   ‘I thought that would make it more in-ter-es-ting!’ he said with great
authority. ‘Perhaps this might ignite the flames of love between the saved
and the saviour! Did you ever think of that?’
   ‘No.’
   ‘Well, you’re an idiot,’ Stanishevsky shot back. ‘And now let’s go to
François’s for some ice cream.’
   After every examination we squandered what little money we had by
stuffing ourselves full of ice cream – four servings or more – at François’s
café. For me, trigonometry was the most difficult examination. Somehow, I
passed. The examination dragged on until the evening. We waited after the
examination for the inspector to announce our marks, and, overjoyed that
none of us had failed, we charged loudly out into the street.
   Stanishevsky f lung his bashed-up textbook high into the air as hard as he
could. The pages sprang from the destroyed book, fluttering over our heads
before drifting back down and covering the street. The rest of us found this
marvellous, and so we each took turns to launch our textbooks skyward.
Soon the street was white with paper. From behind, we heard a policeman’s
whistle. We took off running into Fundukleevskaya Street, before ducking
into narrow Nesterovskaya Street. Boys began breaking off to go their
separate ways and after a while only five of us were left: Stanishevsky,
Fitsovsky, Shmukler, Khorozhevsky and myself.
   We headed for the Galitsky Market, where there were a lot of little cafés
and taverns. We had decided to get drunk. The only examination left was
Latin, and no one was afraid of that. We walked along joking and laughing.
As the old saying goes, we were possessed by the devil. Passers-by stopped
to stare. We went into a tavern at the market. The floors stank of stale beer.
There were cubicles along the walls decorated with pink wallpaper that they
called ‘private rooms’. We took one of these ‘rooms’ and ordered vodka
and beef Stroganoff. The proprietor carefully closed the faded curtain of our
cubicle, but we were making so much noise that every so often someone
would come by and peep in. We treated every one of them to some vodka,
and they were happy to drink with us and offer their congratulations on our
finishing school.
   Late that evening the proprietor came over, pulled back the curtain and,
motioning with his eyes towards the door, said in a low voice: ‘There’s a
snooper outside.’
   ‘What sort of snooper?’ Stanishevsky asked.
   ‘A policeman, from the Criminal Investigation Division. You need to get
out of here now. Go out through the back door. You’ll find a passageway in
the courtyard leading to Bulvarno-Kudryavskaya Street.’
   We didn’t take the proprietor seriously, but still we left through the back
door into a dark, smelly courtyard. Ducking our heads under the clothes
lines, we filed past dustbins and woodsheds and reached Bulvarno-
Kudryavskaya Street. No one had followed us. We ducked through a
passageway into the dimly lit street. A round-shouldered man in a bowler
hat was waiting for us.
   ‘Good evening!’ he wheezed menacingly, doffing his hat. ‘Have you
boys had a nice little time?’
   We said nothing and walked off down Bulvarno-Kudryavskaya Street.
The man in the hat followed us. ‘Still wet behind the ears, but just look at
you, already versed in making your getaway through back yards,’ he said,
with malice.
   Stanishevsky stopped. The man in the hat did too. Then he put a hand in
the pocket of his long jacket.
   ‘What do you want?’ Stanishevsky asked. ‘Just bloody well leave us
alone!’
   ‘Frequenting taverns,’ he said. ‘Pupils of the Imperial Gymnasium
frequenting taverns! Don’t you know the punishment is expulsion with a
wolf’s ticket?’
   ‘Let’s go,’ said Stanishevsky. ‘I’m not going to listen to this fool.’
   We walked on. The man in the hat followed. ‘I’m not the fool. You’re the
fools. I once attended the gymnasium too.’
   ‘That’s obvious,’ Shmukler said.
   ‘Why is it obvious?’ the man yelled hysterically. ‘I was kicked out of the
gymnasium with a wolf’s ticket for drinking. And you think I’m going to let
you get away with it? No! I’ll see you expelled with wolf’s tickets if it’s the
last thing I do. Your exams won’t do you any good now – you can say
goodbye to any hope of seeing the university. Were you speaking out
against the government in the tavern? Yes! Were you making jokes about
the imperial family? Yes! I can handle you all. And don’t try any tricks. No
matter what, I’m reporting you to the Okhranka.’
   We turned into a tangle of narrow streets leading to the Svyatoslavsky
ravine. We thought the agent would be too afraid to follow us into this
desolate, forgotten part of the city, but he stuck to our heels.
   ‘Couldn’t the five of us take him?’ Stanishevsky asked.
   We stopped. The agent pulled a revolver out of his pocket and showed it
to us with a laugh. We led him through the streets for a long time, being
certain to avoid the large intersections patrolled by the police. Fitsovsky
suggested that we disappear one by one. The agent would be sure to stick
with the group, until only one was left. One of us would be caught, but at
least not all five. We all thought this was a bad idea. We would stick
together like true comrades. We mocked the agent. Each of us loudly recited
a made-up biography for him, full of increasingly monstrous and insulting
details. He was huffing with rage and was getting tired, but still he clung to
us with the obstinacy of a madman.
   It began to grow light in the east. It was time to act. We made a plan and
then circled through several small alleys before coming to Stanishevsky’s
house. A high stone wall, with a ledge running along its base, faced the
street. On the count of three, we ran straight at the wall, jumped on the
ledge, and then launched ourselves up and over. Our school gymnastics
lessons had come in handy. A pile of bricks lay at our feet. Soon they were
raining down on the agent on the other side of the wall. He let out a scream,
retreated to the middle of the street, and fired his revolver. The bullet flew
harmlessly over our heads.
   We tore through the forecourt into an inner yard and then bounded up the
stairs to the Stanishevskys’ flat on the third floor. Within minutes we had
undressed and were stretched out on the chairs and sofas listening for
sounds from the street. Stanishevsky’s father, a silver-haired lawyer with
bristly whiskers, was pacing from room to room in his dressing gown. He
shared our fighting mood, but implored us to calm down, stay where we
were and keep away from the windows. At first we could hear someone
frantically yanking the gate and cursing the porter. Then we heard the
voices of the agent and several policemen down in the yard. We were lucky
that the yard belonging to the Stanishevskys’ house had a back entrance,
and the porter was telling them that the boys must have run straight through
and out into the next street. Making a good deal of noise, the agent and the
police eventually left. We slept the sleep of the dead until noon the next day.
To be certain the coast was clear, we sent our own agents – Stanishevsky’s
sisters – out into the street. They reported seeing nothing suspicious, and we
all went home. Strange as it now seems, we had in fact narrowly escaped a
serious danger: unavoidable expulsion and a wolf’s ticket just two days
before graduation, a fate equal to civic death.
   Finally, the marvellous day arrived when the director, standing behind a
green baize table in the Assembly Hall, handed out our diplomas and
congratulated each of us on graduating. The gymnasium was all lit up, little
coloured lanterns hung from the trees in the garden, an orchestra played.
   Before the dancing began, Suboch gave a speech:

  As fourth formers I could barely tolerate you. In the fifth form, I began
  to educate you, although the odds of moulding you into true men were
  slim. In the sixth, I made friends with you. In the seventh, I became
  truly attached to you, and in the eighth, you even made me proud of
  you. I am an unhappy father. I have too many children, no fewer than
  forty. Moreover, every few years my children leave me and new ones
  arrive. So, you might say I have forty times more disappointments than
  most parents. And forty times as much bother. This is perhaps why I
  have not been able to pay you all the same amount of attention. It
  makes me sad to part with you. I have tried to mould you into good
  people. You, for your part, have given my life meaning. You kept me
  young. I hereby forgive you, now and forever, all of your ridiculous
  idiocies, even your fights with Section One. Everything is forgiven. I
  am not being generous, but I challenge you to become generous
  yourselves. Heine said that there are more fools on this earth than there
  are people. He was exaggerating, of course. But what did he mean by
  this? He meant that every day we meet people whose existence brings
  neither them nor those around them any joy or benefit. You ought to
  fear being useless. Whatever you may end up becoming in this life,
  remember the wise old counsel: ‘Don’t let a day go by without writing
  at least one line.’ Work hard! For what is talent other than work, work,
  work? Learn to love work, and may you always be sorry to put it
  down. May your journey ahead be a happy one! And don’t think
  unkindly of your teachers, who have gone grey in their battles with
  you.

   We threw ourselves at him, and he kissed each and every one of us.
   ‘And now,’ said Suboch, ‘a few words in Latin!’ He waved his arms and
broke into song: Gaudeamus igitur juvenes dum sumus! Let us rejoice,
therefore, while we are young!
   We joined in the chorus of our first school song. Then the ball opened.
Stanishevsky was the master of ceremonies. He directed the saviour-boys to
invite the saved-girls onto the floor for a waltz. It was then I became
acquainted with the thin girl with joyful eyes – Olga Bogushevich. She
wore a white dress. Lowering her eyes and pale with embarrassment, she
thanked me for my help. I told her it was nothing. We danced. Then I
brought her some ice cream from the buffet. We escorted the girls home
after the ball. Olga Bogushevich lived in the Lipki neighbourhood. I walked
with her through the dark night under the leafy green canopy of the trees.
By the time we parted, we had become friends.
   From there I went to Fitsovsky’s, where our circle was spending the rest
of the night. We had pooled our funds for a supper with wine and invited
Suboch, Selikhanovich and Johanson. Johanson sang songs by Schubert,
brilliantly accompanied by Suboch on some empty bottles. We made a lot
of noise and went home after the sun had come up, but before the streets
had lost their long, cold shadows. Upon parting, we gave each other warm
hugs, and then each of us went his separate way filled with a strange feeling
of happiness and grief.
OceanofPDF.com
38
Summer Lightning



And there they were, just as I remembered them – the same leaves of the
hazel trees just outside my window, glinting from the raindrops. And there
was the same sun shining on the drenched park, the same sound of water
rushing over the dam. The same Rëvny, but this time no Lyuba.
   The Karelins’ dacha stood empty and boarded up. A black dog had made
itself a home on the verandah. Whenever someone came near, the stray
jumped up and ran off to hide in the bushes, its tail between its legs. It lay
there a long time, until the danger had passed. Sasha had come down with
diphtheria and so the Karelins would not be arriving until the end of the
summer, if at all. No one knew for certain.
   The weather had been irregular that summer, with many violent
thunderstorms. Uncle Kolya said it was due to more sunspots than normal.
The incessant rains were followed by a drought. Calm days were suddenly
ruined by a hot wind which brought a dry haze. The water in the river
darkened. The tops of the pines shook and rattled and made an unsettling
sound. Dust hovered over the roadways, harrowing travellers and whirling
in thick clouds off to the horizon.
   ‘It’s a hard, dry summer,’ the peasants all said.
   The leaves shrivelled on the lime trees. The river began to dry up. The
morning dew thinned out, and in the heat of the day you could hear the
dried seeds popping in the grass. The hot fields were littered with the white
tufts of burdock.
   ‘There’ll be quite a storm after such heat,’ everyone said.
   Finally, a storm did come. It arrived slowly, and Gleb Afanasiev and I
watched it make its way all through the morning. The stifling heat in the
bathing hut by the river was enough to give you a headache. We lay in the
warm river water for a long time, neither of us wanting to get out.
   It was as if smoke filled the sky, and beyond the smoke you could make
out enormous black tufts of what looked like petrified cotton wool. These
were the thunderheads showing through the dust. Everything was deathly
quiet. The birds and frogs had fallen silent, the fish had stopped jumping.
Even the leaves, fearful of the storm, had stopped rustling. Mordan had
crawled off under the dacha and lay there whining softly and refusing to
come out. The only sound came from people still walking about and calling
to each other, although you could tell they too felt something was wrong.
   The smoky haze dissipated towards dusk, and a single storm cloud, as
black as night, filled half the sky. It vibrated with lightning, but there was
no sound of thunder. A smudgy moon rose in the east and advanced towards
the cloud all on its own, deserted by everyone, not a single star at its back.
It turned pale with each flash of lightning. And then, finally, the earth drew
a deep, refreshing sigh. The first crash of thunder rolled through the woods
and away to the south over the fields of grain rippling in the wind. As its
last rumble slowly died away, a second crash exploded and took off in the
same direction to the south, shaking the ground as it went.
   ‘That’s the Prophet Elijah up in heaven,’ said Gleb. ‘He’s out for a drive.’
   Yellow vortices could now be seen scurrying about inside the cloud,
whose edges had begun bending down towards the ground. Lightning
flashed and danced through the dark caves of the sky. The village church
bell began to ring – two quick strikes followed by a pause, repeated over
and over. This was the signal to extinguish all fires. We dampened the
stoves, closed the windows, doors and shutters, and then sat down on the
verandah to wait.
   On the far side of the park there arose a terrifying roar, as vast as the
earth itself. The sound was too much for Aunt Marusya and she went back
inside. The roar advanced on us, like an ocean, washing everything aside in
its path. It was the wind. Our ears rang from the deafening howl. The
ancient lime trees creaked. A yellow haze tore over the ground. Glass
shattered. An unbelievably intense white light flared in this haze, followed
by such a crash that it sounded like the entire dacha had been driven into the
earth up to the roofline. A fiery yellow ball rolled along the treetops, hissing
and smoking as it went before exploding with a sharp crack like an artillery
shell.
   ‘If only it would rain!’ Aunt Marusya kept saying. ‘If only it would rain!’
   Finally, the rain fell. Grey torrents poured down onto the wind-blown
park. The downpour droned louder, picking up strength. The drum of the
rain soothed us, and we went off to our separate rooms and fell fast asleep.
   I awoke in the middle of the night to the sound of barking dogs and
snorting horses, followed by hurried footsteps, laughter and the clatter of
dishes. Gleb was also awake. The rain had stopped, but the lightning was
still flashing.
   ‘Kostik,’ said Gleb, ‘my prophetic soul tells me someone’s just arrived.
But I can’t tell who. Listen.’
   We lay there quietly for a few minutes. Gleb then jumped out of bed and
began to dress in the dark.
   ‘It’s them!’ he said. ‘I hear the divine strains of Sasha’s voice. It’s the
Karelins! Get up!’
   I began throwing on my clothes. I could hear Aunt Marusya downstairs:
‘Yes, Kostik’s here. Oh, for a long time now. And Gleb too. We should get
them up.’
   ‘Let them sleep,’ said Maria Trofimovna. ‘We’ve got all day tomorrow to
talk. I still don’t know how we ever managed to make it. We waited two
hours in Ryabchevka for the storm to pass. Thank God it’s a sandy road or it
would’ve been washed out.’
   ‘Come on, let’s go!’ said Gleb.
   ‘You go first.’
   ‘Aha!’ Gleb said. ‘Nervous are you, young man?’
   ‘Why should I be nervous?’
   ‘Then let’s go together!’
   We went downstairs. The lamps were burning. Aunt Marusya had
prepared tea. Wet suitcases were lined up against the wall. Maria
Trofimovna was sitting at the table. Sasha rushed over to meet us and kissed
Gleb and then me. She was frightfully thin, but her eyes shone just as
before. We kissed Maria Trofimovna’s hand.
   ‘My, look how much sun you’ve had!’ she said, stroking my cheek.
   Lyuba was kneeling on the floor with her back to us and rummaging in a
basket. She didn’t bother to turn round and went on trying to find
something.
   ‘Lyuba,’ said Maria Trofimovna, ‘don’t you see Kostik and Gleb are
here?’
   ‘Yes, just a minute,’ she replied, slowly standing up. ‘I can’t find the
lemons, Mama.’
   ‘Don’t bother, we can do without them.’
   Lyuba turned around, smoothed her hair, and held out her hand. She gave
me a quick glance and then looked away.
   ‘Sit, everyone,’ said Aunt Marusya, ‘the tea’s getting cold.’
   We sat down at the table. Uncle Kolya was out on the verandah. I could
hear him pouring water on someone’s hands. Whoever it was was scrubbing
and snorting and protesting: ‘Please, for the love of God, don’t trouble
yourself. Thank you so much.’
   ‘Who’s that?’ I asked Sasha.
   She put her arm around my shoulder and whispered in my ear: ‘Lenka
Mikhelson. From Lyuba’s college. An artist. A true Wunderkind. And an
ass.’
   ‘Who?’ I asked again, confused.
   ‘You’ll see for yourself. I hate him.’
   ‘Sasha!’ Maria Trofimovna snapped. ‘Stop whispering!’
   Lyuba shot Sasha an annoyed look and then dropped her eyes.
   Uncle Kolya came in from the verandah followed by a tall youth, busy
drying his hands, in spectacles with a long face and large teeth. With a
good-natured smile, he greeted Gleb and me. Although clumsy and terribly
short-sighted, it was immediately apparent that, as Mama loved to say, he
was from ‘a good family’. He had manners and an air of confidence and
was obviously one of those city types.
   He took a seat at the table, accepted a cup of tea from Aunt Marusya,
thanked her and said: ‘Ah yes, there’s nothing like country life!’
   Gleb snorted. Aunt Marusya looked worriedly at Gleb and me, but then
Sasha said: ‘Lenka, here, have some jam. It’s strawberry.’ Uncle Kolya
gave Gleb a stern look, which quickly turned into a smile.
   After tea we helped the Karelins bring their things over to their dacha.
The park gently rustled as it shook off the rain. The cocks crowed in the
village in various keys. Dawn was breaking over the tops of the trees. The
Karelins threw themselves into unpacking. The sun rose, gilding the
verandah railing and casting its light on the uncommonly fresh and clean
morning. Lenka Mikhelson stood outside the Karelins’ dacha and doodled
in the sandy path with a stick.
    ‘What a morning! Let’s go for a swim!’ Gleb said, after we had lugged
over the last of the luggage and been thrown out of the dacha by Maria
Trofimovna, who refused to let us help unpack.
    We got our towels and headed off to the bathing hut. On the way we saw
what Lenka had been drawing in the sand: it was a profile very much like
Lyuba’s with a shining sun above it and the words ‘O golden light of
braided sun!’
    ‘What a Decadent!’ Gleb fumed: ‘Foolish nonsense!’ He walked on,
swinging his towel. Then, without looking at me, he said: ‘Just forget about
it, Kostik, don’t give it a second thought. Seriously, forget about it. It’s not
worth letting it ruin your summer. Come on, I’ll race you!’
    He ran off with me right behind him. Frogs, fearing for their lives,
jumped out of the way and into the wet grass. The white ball of the sun rose
higher and higher. The sky, rinsed clean by the rain, shone brighter and
brighter.
    By the time I reached the bathing hut, I felt as if I was almost over my
sadness. I was hot and out of breath, my heart was pounding, and I thought:
Am I really going to torment myself over Lyuba, over some conceited girl,
on such a beautiful morning as this when a nice long summer day stretches
out before me? Uncle Kolya joined us. We swam, dived and splashed about
so much that our waves rocked the water lilies up and down all the way
over by the dam. I had almost forgotten that I had survived my first
betrayal. All I wanted was to show Lyuba that it didn’t upset me in the least
and that my life was so full of such interesting things that it was just silly
for me to suffer because of some summer romance with its sighs and
shadowy confessions.
    ‘It’s true, isn’t it?’ I asked myself. ‘Is my infatuation with Lyuba better
than this sun?’ Its rays were falling through the trees onto the dark water
below. ‘In what way is it better than the heavenly smell of these hayfields?
In what way is it any better than this little beetle scurrying along the banya
wall?’ It was easy to console myself, perhaps because I was surrounded by
so much rare beauty.
    Gleb climbed up on top of the bathing hut, raised his arms to the sun and
proclaimed in a mocking tone: ‘O, golden light of braided sun!’ and then
jumped into the water with a yell.
    ‘Hey, you ruffians,’ said Uncle Kolya. ‘Out of the water. After tea we’re
going to do some exploring.’
   ‘Where?’ I asked.
   ‘Downriver, past Melovaya Hill.’
   I climbed out of the water. It felt good to walk over the warm dry planks
in my bare feet. I looked back at my wet footprints and watched them
evaporate before my eyes. My towel smelled of sea salt. The sun warmed
my body and my damp head, and all I wanted to do was talk and laugh and
then race Gleb back to the dacha, which we did with Mordan and
Chetvertak chasing after us, barking wildly, and trying to snatch the towels
from our hands. We tore past the Karelins’ place making a terrible racket
and crashed onto the verandah, frightening poor Aunt Marusya.
   After tea we went downriver with Uncle Kolya. Gleb and I drew a map
as we walked and dreamed up names for every bend, backwater, cliff and
tranquil site. We were thoroughly lashed by the branches and tall grass. Our
shirts were yellow with pollen. The riverbanks smelled of sand and warm
reeds. With a thoughtful air, Gleb said: ‘I can’t stand being melancholy.’
   And so, the summer passed. Soon the hot days came to an end. Storms
raged over the park and piled their clouds on the tops of the trees. The
clouds became caught and left damp rags of mist behind in the branches as
they tore themselves free and raced off to the horizon as if in fear. The park
swayed and moaned. On the river the leaves of the water lilies stood
straight up. The rain pounded on the roof. It was so loud on the top floor
you felt as if you were inside a drum.
   Everyone but Uncle Kolya, Gleb and I cursed the foul weather. We put
on our raincoats and walked over to the dam, telling ourselves we needed to
check the fishing lines we had put out the day before. The real reason we
went, however, was to fill our lungs to bursting with the raw stormy wind.
It was blowing so hard it plastered wet leaves torn from the trees to our
faces. Our raincoats turned as stiff as wood. We found ourselves in the heart
of the storm and had to turn our backs to the wind so we could breathe.
   ‘Marvellous!’ Uncle Kolya shouted. ‘Absolutely marvellous! Just make
sure you don’t get blown away!’
   ‘Ah yes, there’s nothing like country life!’ shouted Gleb. He was still
making fun of Lenka Mikhelson.
   We made a tour around our property. The old willows twisted violently,
their branches stretched and torn in every direction, exposing the grey
underside of their leaves. The trees fought against the wind with all their
might, until they began to crack and splinter. Jackdaws rode the wind. We
could see their open beaks but not hear their screams. There was one place
behind the tall dam sheltered from the wind. We crawled down through the
weeds to reach it. Nettles lashed our faces, but we felt nothing. Uncle Kolya
kept his fishing rods hidden here behind a log. We took them out with
shaking hands, as if we were a bunch of thieves. What would Aunt Marusya
say if she saw us now, fishing in the midst of such a storm? It would prove
to her we were indeed the lunatics she had always considered us to be.
    We cast our lines. The wind howled just over our heads, but here in our
little shelter all was quiet.
    ‘We won’t get any bites,’ said Gleb. ‘Fish aren’t as crazy as we are!’ He
said it on purpose as if to reassure the fish that they were safe, but in fact he
desperately wanted to catch one. And sure enough, as if by a miracle our
floats slowly sank below the surface of the cold water.
    ‘You’ve both caught a carp!’ shouted Uncle Kolya.
    We began to pull in the strong, tin-coloured fish. The wind raged even
harder. Rain thundered down onto the water. We didn’t notice a thing.
    ‘You’re not frozen?’ Uncle Kolya yelled.
    ‘No! This is wonderful!’
    ‘We’ll keep fishing?’
    ‘Of course!’
    The storm lasted five days and finally ended one night. No one saw it
happen. I woke up in the morning to the twitter of birds. The sun was
struggling to pierce the fog that had swallowed the park. The fog was a light
blue – evidently the sky above it was clear. Uncle Kolya had set up the
samovar near the verandah. Smoke poured out of its pipe into the air.
Upstairs we caught the aroma of burnt pinecones.
    I lay in bed and looked out of the window. There before me, in the crown
of an old lime tree, I beheld a miracle. A shaft of sunlight had broken
through the leaves and, its refracted rays scattering here and there, ignited
countless little lights of green and gold. It was a sight no painter could ever
capture, especially not Lenka Mikhelson. In his pictures, the sky was
orange, the trees were blue, and people’s faces were the green of unripe
melons. It was all just some sort of invention, as, perhaps, had been my
infatuation with Lyuba. Whatever it might have been, I was now cured. I
couldn’t help wondering whether it was the long summer storm that had
done the trick.
   I watched as the sunlight penetrated deeper and deeper into the recesses
of the tree. It fell on the season’s first yellow leaf, then on a tomtit sitting on
a twig, then on a raindrop, which hung there, quivering, just about to fall.
   ‘Kostik, Gleb, do you hear that?’ Uncle Kolya called up from down
below.
   ‘Hear what?’
   ‘The cranes!’
   We listened. Strange sounds came from the foggy blue, as if water were
being poured back and forth up in the sky.

                               OceanofPDF.com
39
A Small Dose of Poison



The village chemist sometimes visited Uncle Kolya. His name was Lazar
Borisovich. He struck us as a rather strange chemist. He wore an old
student’s uniform. A pince-nez, tied with a black string, balanced unsteadily
over his wide nose. He was short and squat, with a thick beard that grew all
the way up to his eyes and a wicked tongue.
   Lazar Borisovich had been born in Vitebsk and attended Kharkov
University, although he never took a degree. Now he lived over the local
chemist’s shop with his hunchbacked sister. We suspected he was somehow
connected to the revolutionary movement. He always carried with him
pamphlets by Plekhanov, every page of which he had marked up with his
fat red and blue pencils, underlining certain words and passages and filling
the margins with exclamation and question marks. On Sundays he visited
some quiet corner of the park with his pamphlets, spread out his jacket, lay
down and read, one leg crossed over the other, a heavy black boot swinging
in the air.
   One day I visited Lazar Borisovich at the shop to buy some powders for
Aunt Marusya. She had come down with a migraine. I liked the chemist’s
shop. It was located in a clean old peasant hut with a covered floor, a
geranium in one corner and shelves filled with porcelain jars. It smelled of
medicinal herbs. Lazar Borisovich gathered the herbs himself and then
dried them to make potions. I had never set foot in a house as creaky as this.
Every floorboard made its own distinct squeak, as did the chairs, the
wooden sofa, the shelves and the desk at which Lazar Borisovich wrote his
prescriptions. His movements produced so many different rasps and scrapes
that it seemed as if there were several fiddlers inside scraping their bows
across tight, dry strings.
   Lazar Borisovich knew every last one of these sounds and could tell
exactly where each came from. ‘Manya!’ he would yell at his sister. ‘Didn’t
you hear Vaska sneak into the kitchen? There’s fish in there!’
   Vaska was the chemist’s mangy black cat. Sometimes the chemist said to
us customers: ‘Please don’t sit on that sofa or the noise will drive me out of
my mind.’
   Grinding powders in his mortar, he liked to say that, thank God, the shop
creaked less in damp weather than during dry spells. Then the mortar would
let out a screech, the customer would jump, and Lazar Borisovich would
say triumphantly: ‘Aha! I see you also suffer from nerves!’
   Now, as he prepared powders for Aunt Marusya, Lazar Borisovich
produced a series of creaks and squeaks and said: ‘The Greek philosopher
Socrates was poisoned with hemlock. It’s true! And we’ve got an entire
forest of that hemlock growing right here, in the marsh down by the mill.
I’m warning you. It’s got white flowers that look like little umbrellas. The
poison’s in the roots. That said, in small doses poison is useful. I think all of
us should sprinkle a little dose of poison in our food now and then to get us
going and clear out the brain.’
   ‘You believe in homeopathy?’
   ‘As a psychological remedy? Yes!’ Lazar Borisovich said with
conviction. ‘You’re sceptical? All right then, let’s try it out on you, as an
experiment.’
   I was curious, and so I said yes.
   ‘I also know’, he said, ‘that being young gives you a certain licence,
especially when you’re just finishing school and about to go off to
university. Your head must be like a merry-go-round. But still, it’s high time
you started doing some serious thinking!’
   ‘About what?’
   ‘As if you didn’t know!’ Lazar Borisovich exclaimed angrily. ‘Here you
are now, just starting out in life. Right? Well, what are you going to do with
that life of yours, if I may ask? What are you going to be? How will you
make your way? Do you really think you can just go on having a good time,
fooling around, avoiding all responsibility? Life is not a holiday, young
man! No! One thing I can tell you for certain – we are on the eve of great
events. Yes! I assure you of that. I know your uncle Nikolai Grigorievich
laughs at me, but we shall see who’s right. And so, I’d like to know: what
do you want to be?’
   ‘I want to be . . .’ I began.
   ‘Never mind!’ Lazar Borisovich interrupted. ‘I know what you’re going
to say. That you want to be an engineer, a doctor, a scholar or some such
thing. None of this is important.’
   ‘What is important then?’
   ‘Jus-tice!’ he shouted. ‘You must be on the side of the people. You must
be one with them, you must be for them. Be whatever you want, a dentist
for all I care, but fight for a better life for the people. Got it?’
   ‘But why are you telling me this?’
   ‘Why? Just because, no special reason. You’re a nice lad, but you don’t
really like to think too much. I noticed that long ago. So, please do me this
favour – start using that mind of yours!’
   ‘I’m going to be a writer,’ I said, blushing.
   ‘A writer?’ Lazar Borisovich straightened his pince-nez and fixed me
with a terrifying stare. ‘Ha! And who doesn’t want that? Maybe I’d like to
be a Leo Tolstoy myself.’
   ‘But I’ve already started to write . . . and have even been published.’
   ‘Well then,’ Lazar Borisovich said emphatically, ‘please wait a minute.
I’ll just weigh these powders and then walk you back. We’ve got to clear
this up.’
   He was clearly excited, and twice dropped his pince-nez while weighing
out the powders. We went out and walked through the field towards the
river and from there to the park. The sun was setting in the woods beyond
the river. Lazar Borisovich plucked the tops of the wormwood plants,
crushed them and then smelled his fingers. He said: ‘This is a big thing you
want to do, and it demands a thorough knowledge of life. Am I right? And
you have very little, if any, to be quite honest. A writer! Oh, he must know
so much, it’s terrifying just to imagine it. He must understand everything!
He has to work like an ox and not chase after fame. Well, one thing I can
tell you – you’ve got to go everywhere, you’ve got to see everything with
your own eyes. Go to the peasants’ huts, the markets, the factories, the
shelters. Everything, everywhere. The theatres, the hospitals, the mines, the
prisons. You must let yourself be steeped in life, let it impregnate you, like
valerian in alcohol. This is the only way to create a true infusion. Then you
can offer it to people as a miracle cure. In specified doses, of course. Yes,
indeed!’
   He went on talking about what it meant to be a writer for a long time. We
parted outside the park.
   ‘You’re wrong to think I’m a lazy good-for-nothing,’ I said.
   ‘Oh, but I don’t,’ Lazar Borisovich said, grabbing my hand. ‘I’m happy
for you. You can see that. But admit that there’s some truth in what I said,
and now you’ve got something to really think about, after my little dose of
poison. Eh?’
   He peered into my eyes while still holding my hand. Then he sighed and
walked away. I watched him walk across the field, a short and scraggy little
man, plucking the wormwood as he went. Then he stopped, pulled a large
penknife out of his pocket, squatted on his heels, and started digging some
medicinal root out of the ground.
   The chemist’s experiment had worked. I realised that I knew almost
nothing and had given little thought to so many important things. I took this
funny little man’s advice and soon went out into the world, into that school
of life which no books or idle daydreaming can replace. It was hard,
demanding work. Being young made it possible. I never even stopped to
wonder whether or not I had the strength to make it through this school. I
was certain I did.
   That evening we all went over to Melovaya Hill – a steep cliff along the
river overgrown with young pine trees. From there we looked out into the
vast, warm autumn night. We sat down on the edge of the cliff. The water
rushed over the dam below. The birds stirred in the trees, settling down for
the night. The last lightning of the summer flashed over the woods. Then,
for just a moment, you could make out some thin clouds like faint puffs of
smoke along the horizon.
   ‘What are you thinking about, Kostik?’ Gleb asked.
   ‘Nothing much . . . just thinking.’
   I was thinking that I would never believe anyone who told me that this
life – with its love, its longing for truth and happiness, with its summer
lightning and its distant sound of water in the night – is without purpose and
meaning. Each of us must struggle to affirm this life, everywhere and every
day, as long as we live.

                             OceanofPDF.com
Book Two
RESTLESS YOUTH



                 OceanofPDF.com
40
‘Here Lives Nobody’



On Professor Gilyarov’s front door hung a brass plate with an inscription:
‘Here Lives Nobody’.
   Gilyarov lectured on the history of philosophy to the students of Kiev
University. Grey-haired, bearded and wearing a baggy, shiny jacket covered
in tobacco ash, he would hurry up to the rostrum, grabbing hold of its edges
with his knotty hands, and begin to speak in a dull, inarticulate, almost
reluctant voice. Outside the windows of the auditorium, it appeared as if the
gilded gardens of Kiev were on fire. Autumn in Kiev dragged on for a long
time. Our southern summer amassed so much warm sun, so much greenery
and so much scent in its city parks that it was loath to say goodbye to this
bounty and make way for the approaching autumn. Almost every year,
summer would wreak havoc on the calendar and delay its departure.
   As soon as Gilyarov began to speak, we students were lost to the world
around us. We followed the professor’s vague mumbling, transfixed by the
miracle of the human mind. Gilyarov revealed it to us slowly, almost
angrily. Entire epochs called out to one another across the centuries in his
lectures. We could not escape the sensation that one could not divide the
great flow of human thought into discrete blocks, that it was impossible to
tell where philosophy stops and poetry begins, and where poetry merges
into regular, everyday life. Sometimes Gilyarov would pull out of the
bulging pocket of his jacket a small volume of poetry with an owl – the bird
of wisdom – embossed on its cover and read a few lines, as a way to prove
some philosophical point:

       Should our sun forget today
       Its path and lose its way,
       Some madman would have his say,
       Conjuring up a whole new world the very next day.
   Once in a while the bristles on his cheeks would stand up and Gilyarov’s
squinty eyes would laugh. This usually happened when he talked about
learning to know ourselves. After these lectures I would be filled with a
belief in the infinite power of the human mind. Gilyarov would yell at us.
He commanded us not to bury our potential in the ground. We must work
on ourselves like the devil to develop all that lay inside us. We must
become like the experienced conductor who knows how to elicit every
possible sound from his orchestra and can force even the most stubborn
musician to play his instrument to the fullest. ‘Man’, Gilyarov liked to say,
‘must give meaning to life, he must enrich and beautify it.’
   Gilyarov’s idealism was tainted with bitterness and a perpetual regret
about its gradual decay. Among the many of his sayings that have stayed
with me is the one about ‘idealism’s last sunset and its deathbed ideas’. This
old professor, who looked a good deal like Émile Zola, had nothing but
contempt for the prosperous bourgeoisie and the liberal intelligentsia of the
day. Thus the brass plate on his door with its acknowledgement of man’s
worthlessness. We understood, of course, that Gilyarov had hung it
specifically to annoy his respectable neighbours. Gilyarov was always
talking about one’s obligation to enrich life. But we did not know how,
exactly, this was to be done. Fairly quickly I came to the conclusion that in
my case this meant trying to express as deeply as possible my sincere
kinship with the Russian people. But how? In what way? When I thought
about it, it seemed to me that the truest path must lie in becoming a writer.
It was then that I realised that the only possible road in life for me was
writing, that writing was my only way forward.
   It was at that moment that my adult life began – often difficult,
occasionally joyous – but always restless and so varied and changing that
it’s easy to get lost when trying to remember it all. My youth had begun
with my final years at the gymnasium, and it ended with the First World
War. It ended, in other words, sooner than it should have. But then my
generation was fated to experience enough wars, coups, trials, hopes,
troubles and joys to last several generations of our forefathers. In the
amount of time it takes Jupiter to orbit the sun, we had experienced so much
that just thinking about it makes my heart ache. Our progeny will, of
course, envy us for having taken part in and witnessed such monumental
events.
   The university was the centre of all progressive thinking in the city. Like
most of the new students, I was at first shy and nervous and at a loss when
meeting the older students, especially those so-called ‘eternal’ ones. These
bearded men in their shabby, unbuttoned coats looked upon us first-year
students as mindless puppies. What’s more, I simply could not get used to
the fact that, unlike at the gymnasium, attendance at lectures was not
mandatory and one could just as easily sit at home reading a book or spend
the day out enjoying the city without fear of punishment. I gradually grew
accustomed to the university and came to love it. It wasn’t the lectures I
loved, or the professors (there weren’t many good ones), but the nature of
university life itself. The lectures went on, in their own way, in the
classrooms, while the turbulent and noisy life of the students went on in its
own way, independent of the lectures, in the university’s long, dark
hallways. All day long, the hallways echoed with arguments, meetings were
held here, associations came together, factions formed, all under thick
clouds of tobacco smoke.
   It was here I first learned about the violent disagreements among the
Bolsheviks, the Mensheviks and the Socialist Revolutionaries, about the
Bundists, the Dashnaks, Ukrainian nationalists and the Paole Zion party.1
Despite their differences, all of them would come together to confront a
common foe – the so-called White Shirts, members of the Academic Union,
a Black Hundreds group. Quarrels with the White Shirts often led to
physical brawls, especially when students from the Caucasus were
involved.
   In the boiling intensity of these passions one could already feel the
approach of some new era. It seemed strange that just a few steps away
from all this passion, behind the doors of the lecture halls, respected, elderly
professors were lecturing in quiet boredom about the trading practices of
the Hanseatic League or comparative linguistics. In those years before the
First World War many people sensed the coming of the storm, but they
could not foresee the violence it would unleash on the earth. The air was
thick and heavy then in Russia, and in much of the world, as it is before a
storm. But the storm had yet to break, and this gave those with little
foresight a feeling of calm. Alarm signals were sounding in the morning
mist around Kiev like flashes of light from a distant yet approaching storm
– striking workers, arrests and exile, endless proclamations. But it took a
sensitive ear to make out behind all this the threatening rumble of the storm
itself. This is why its first deafening crash in the summer of 1914 with the
outbreak of the war stunned everyone.
   After leaving school we all soon lost track of each other even though we
had sworn this would never happen. First came the war, followed by the
revolution, and since then I have seen hardly any of my classmates. The
cheerful Stanishevsky disappeared somewhere, along with the home-grown
philosopher Fitsovsky, the reserved Shmukler, the sluggish Matusevich and
the birdlike Bulgakov.
   I was living in Kiev. Mama, Galya and my brother Dima, a student of the
Technological Institute, were in Moscow. My other brother, Borya, was also
in Kiev, but we almost never saw each other. He had married a short, plump
woman, who went around in a lavender Japanese kimono embroidered with
cranes. Borya spent his days hunched over his designs for concrete bridges.
His dark room, with its imitation oak wallpaper, smelled of fixative. The
floor was sticky with paint. Photographs of the international beauty Lina
Cavalieri were pinned to the wall.
   Borya did not approve of my interest in philosophy and literature. ‘You
must find your place in this world,’ he liked to say. ‘You’re a dreamer, just
like Papa. Entertaining people is not serious business.’ He thought literature
was merely for people’s entertainment. I did not want to argue with him. I
guarded my passion for literature from others’ disapproval, and for this
reason I stopped going to see Borya.
   I was still living with our grandmother in the leafy Kievan suburb of
Lukyanovka in a wing of the house deep in the garden. My room was filled
with pots of fuchsias. I spent my days reading to the point of exhaustion. To
get a bit of air, I would go out into the garden in the evening. The autumn
air was cold and clear, and the stars shone through the barren trees. At first
Grandmother would get cross and call me back inside, but then she got used
to it and left me in peace. She would only say that I was just wasting my
time, and this would inevitably lead to an attack of galloping consumption.
But what could Grandmother do with my new friends? What could she
object to about Pushkin or Heine, Fet or Leconte de Lisle, Dickens or
Lermontov?
   In the end, Grandmother washed her hands of me. She would sit in her
room, light her lamp with its pink glass shade shaped like a large tulip, and
lose herself in one of the infinite number of novels by Kraszewski. And I
recalled the poet’s lines: ‘Only at night, like a call from the heart, / Do the
stars’ golden eyelashes sparkle in the dark.’2 To me it seemed the earth was
a repository for a great many treasures not unlike those golden eyelashes of
the stars. I believed that life was preparing for me many fascinating things –
encounters, loves, joys and sorrows, and shocks, and this premonition was
the great happiness of my youth. What was to be, only the future could tell.
   ‘And now,’ as actors of old used to say to the audience before the play
began, ‘we shall present to you various incidents from real life and we shall
try to make you reflect upon them, to make you laugh, and to make you
cry.’


1 The Bolsheviks, led by Vladimir Ulyanov (Lenin) (1870–1924), and the
Mensheviks, led by Yuly Martov (1873–1923), were the two main Marxist
parties. The Socialist Revolutionary Party’s programme of agrarian
socialism was popular among the Russian peasantry. The two main Jewish
parties were the General Union of Jewish Workers in Lithuania, Poland and
Russia (known as the Bund) and Paole Zion (‘Workers of Zion’), both of
which were Marxist-socialist but were divided over the question of
Zionism. The Dashnaks refers to the Armenian Revolutionary Federation, a
nationalist-socialist organisation.
2   From Fet’s 1864 poem ‘By Life Tormented’.

                             OceanofPDF.com
41
An Unprecedented Autumn



I took the train from Kiev to Moscow. There were three of us riding in the
cramped box room alongside the carriage heater: an older land surveyor, a
young woman in an Orenburg shawl and myself. The woman sat on the
unlit metal stove while the surveyor and I took turns sitting on the floor;
there wasn’t room for two. Coal dust crunched under our feet. Before long
the woman’s white shawl had turned grey. Nothing could be seen through
the window, which was also matted with grey dust and flecked with dried
streaks of rain. It wasn’t until we were outside Sukhinichi that I caught sight
of an enormous blood-red sunset that filled the whole sky, a sight I’ve
remembered to this day.
   The surveyor, watching the sunset, said that out there, on the border, our
soldiers were probably already fighting the Germans. The woman pressed
the shawl to her face and started to cry: she was on her way to her husband
in Tver and didn’t know whether or not he’d already been sent off to the
front. I was on my way to Moscow to say goodbye to my brother Dima,
who had also been called up. I was too short-sighted to serve in the army.
Moreover, I was the youngest son and a student, and according to the law in
those days youngest sons and students were exempt from military service.
   It was almost impossible to leave the carriage heater, so crowded was the
train. Mobilised soldiers were everywhere – sprawled out on the steps and
the buffers, lying on the roof. Passing through the stations we were met
with women’s wails, whistles, songs and the sound of accordions. The train
would stop and immediately get stuck on the rails. It took two engines, and
a heavy jolt, to get the overloaded train moving again.
   Russia itself was on the move. Like a massive underground tremor, the
war had loosened Russia from its foundations. In thousands of villages,
church bells rang the alarm, announcing the mobilisation. Thousands of
worn-out horses hauled peasant conscripts to the railheads from the most
remote corners of the country. As the enemy invaded Russia from the west,
a mighty human tidal wave rose up in the east to meet him. The entire
country had been turned into an armed camp. Life became unrecognisable.
Everything we had held as familiar and permanent had vanished in an
instant.
   For the whole way to Moscow the only food we had between the three of
us was a stale loaf of bread with raisins and a bottle of cloudy water. It must
have been for this reason that when I stepped out onto the damp platform at
Bryansky station in Moscow I found the morning air so fresh and fragrant.
The summer of 1914 was drawing to a close, that terrible and threatening
first summer of war, and the Moscow air already held the smell of wilting
leaves and stagnant ponds, those sweet, cool aromas of autumn.
   Mama was living in Moscow then, near one of those ponds on Bolshaya
Presnya Street. The flat’s windows opened onto the Zoological Garden. You
could see the ruins of the red brick houses on Presnenskaya Street shelled
during the December uprising of ’05 and the empty paths and the large,
black pond of the Zoological Garden. The sunlight turned the pond scum
into long green strips.
   Never before had I seen a flat that so fully matched the character and life
of its occupants as Mama’s on Presnya Street. It was bare, almost devoid of
furniture, except for the tables in the kitchen and a few creaky bentwood
chairs. The old blackened trees cast shadows into the rooms, filling the flat
with a gloomy chill that never lifted. The tabletops covered with dull, sticky
oilcloths were just as cold. Mama had developed a passion for oilcloths.
They had replaced her linen tablecloths and acted as a persistent reminder
of our new poverty and of how Mama was doing everything possible in her
power to keep the house neat and tidy as in days past. There was simply no
other way for her to live. Only Mama and Galya were there when I arrived.
Dima had left for the firing range at Gravornovo to train reservists.
   In the two years since I had last seen Mama her face had wrinkled and
yellowed, yet her thin lips remained tightly pursed as before, a sign for
others that she would never surrender before life’s hardships or the petty
intrigues of her ill-wishers. Despite everything, she would come out the
victor. As for Galya, she still wandered about the rooms, bumping blindly
into the furniture, and questioning me about all sorts of nonsense: How
much does a ticket from Kiev to Moscow cost now? Do they still have
porters at the railway stations or have they all been sent off to the war?
Mama seemed calmer than on previous visits. I hadn’t expected this. I
couldn’t understand her mood, especially since Dima could be sent to the
front at any moment. Mama herself explained: ‘Things are much better for
us now, Kostik. Dima is an ensign, an officer, with good pay. I no longer
worry that we won’t be able to pay the rent.’ She looked at me,
uncomfortably, and added: ‘Not everyone who goes to war gets killed. I’m
certain Dima won’t be sent to the front. His superior officers think highly of
him.’
   I agreed with her that not everyone gets killed. It would have been wrong
to rob her of this meagre comfort. Looking at Mama, I understood how
crushing this vulnerable daily existence was, how great was the universal
need for a roof over one’s head and a bit of bread. But I couldn’t make
peace with the thought that her happiness about the family’s pitiful new-
found prosperity came at the expense of exposing her son to danger. There
was no way she couldn’t have been aware of the risk. She had simply
decided to try to ignore it.
   Dima returned, suntanned and brimming with self-confidence. He undid
his brand new sword with its gilded hilt and hung it up in the hall. In the
evening, after their single electric bulb had been switched on, the hilt
glittered. It was the sole piece of luxury in Mama’s humble flat. Mama told
me that Dima’s plan to marry Margarita had fallen apart since, it turned out,
in Mama’s words, Margarita ‘was quite an unpleasant individual’. I didn’t
say a word. A few days later Dima was posted to the Navaginsky Infantry
Regiment. He packed up and left so quickly that Mama didn’t have time to
realise what was happening. It was not until the day after his departure that
she cried. Dima’s train was loading from a siding at Brestsky station. It was
an ordinary day, a low sky and a mild wind blowing around some yellow
dust, the kind of day you think nothing special can happen.
   Our farewell with Dima was in keeping with the day. Dima was busy
loading the men on the train. He spoke with us in brief snatches and then
hurriedly said his goodbyes just as the train began to pull away. He raced
after his carriage, jumped up onto the step, and then immediately
disappeared from view behind an inbound train. Once the train had passed,
Dima was no longer to be seen.
   After Dima’s departure I transferred from Kiev to Moscow University.
Mama let Dima’s room to an engineer named Zakharov who worked on the
Moscow trams. To this day I still don’t understand what Zakharov could
have found appealing about our flat. Zakharov had studied in Belgium and
lived for many years in Brussels before returning to Russia not long before
the war. He was a cheerful bachelor with a short grey beard. He was fond of
baggy, foreign-made suits and wore glasses that gave his eyes a penetrating
appearance. The table in his room was piled high with books, none of them
technical, I noticed, but mostly memoirs, novels and editions of Knowledge.
It was among the stack on Zakharov’s table that I came across for the first
time French editions of Verhaeren, Maeterlinck and Rodenbach.1
   Everyone that summer felt great admiration for Belgium, a small country
which had taken the first blow of the German forces. We all sang the
popular song about the defenders of besieged Liège. Belgium was smashed
in a matter of days. It wore the crown of martyrdom. The Gothic stone lace
of its city halls and cathedrals had collapsed and been ground into dust
under the German soldiers’ boots and their cannons’ heavy wheels.
   I read Verhaeren, Maeterlinck and Rodenbach, searching in their works
for the clues to the riddle of their compatriots’ bravery. But I did not find
any clues, not in the dense complexities of Verhaeren’s verse denouncing
the evil of the old world, not in Rodenbach’s novels, as dead and brittle as
flowers set in ice, not in Maeterlinck’s plays, written, so it seemed, in his
sleep. Once I bumped into Zakharov on Tverskoy Boulevard. He took me
by the arm and began to speak of the war, of this great blow to civilisation,
of Belgium. He had a faint French accent.
   Autumn that year in Moscow was magnificent. The trees’ gilded leaves
dropped onto the gun barrels. Weapons and boxes of ammunition lined the
Moscow boulevards, waiting to be shipped to the front. Over the city
migrating birds passed through a clear and unbelievably blue sky lit by the
fading radiance of the sun. And all the time the leaves kept falling and
falling. They piled up on the rooftops, on the pavements and on the roads,
and whispered under the brooms of house porters and the shuffling feet of
the passers-by, as if trying to remind us that all around lay the forgotten
earth, and that for the sake of this very earth, for the sake of the faint lustre
of September cobwebs, for the sake of the clear, dry views of the horizon,
for the sake of still waters rippling from the fall of a bit of tree bark, for the
sake of the yellowing broom shrubs, for the sake of all of Russia, humming
with life and blessed with rare beauty, for the sake of its villages, its peasant
huts, creamy smoke rising up over their thatched roofs, for the sake of the
bluish mist over its rivers, for the sake of Russia’s past and its future – for
the sake of all this, every honest man and woman should come together and
through their enormous united will put a stop to this war.
   I understood, of course, that one could not count on this, that such
thoughts were, as Borya loved to say, ‘pure Quixotism’. I also understood
that the enemy who had raised the sword against us and our culture might
well die from the sword but would never sheath it unless forced. Like an
unstoppable force, the war moved ever closer. It seemed as if the smoke
from its fires already clouded the skies over Moscow. And it truly was
smoke, although not from the war, but from the burning forests and parched
bogs near Tver.
   Every morning when I awoke on the floor of my room – I had no bed – I
looked through the window to see the leaves falling in the sky, twirling their
way downwards. The windowsill cut off much of my view, and so all I
could see was the sky; I never did know just where the leaves were landing.
I couldn’t free myself from the thought that this long, slow flight of leaves
that went on day after day would quite possibly be my last. The leaves
seemed to be flying from west to east, trying to save themselves from the
war. I’m not ashamed to admit to such notions – I was very young then. The
world appeared to be overflowing with lyrical power, a feeling that
undoubtedly emanated from my own self. At the time I mistook this for the
essence of life itself.
   ‘Well, my friend,’ said Zakharov, ‘haven’t you had enough by now of
wandering around the city suburbs in your dreamy condition? Why, Maria
Grigorievna told me that this week alone you’ve managed to take in both
Arkhangelskoe and Ostankino.’2 ‘Take in’ Zakharov said in a particular
tone, the one he always used for Russian words he was still a bit unfamiliar
with.
   ‘Yes, I visited both Arkhangelskoe and Ostankino,’ I admitted. ‘But what
sort of dreamy condition are you referring to?’
   Zakharov grinned. ‘You behave as if the world exists solely to fill your
head with interesting ideas.’
   ‘Well, so what?’ I asked, getting angry. ‘Why is everyone always
accusing me of acting like a little boy?’
   ‘It’s just that you’ve made yourself sick reading all those modern poets,’
he said. ‘Yes, truly sick,’ he added, pleased with himself.
   ‘Judging by your books, you prefer literature to trams.’
   ‘The fact is,’ explained Zakharov, ‘Belgium is the country of trams. And
of mystical poetry. I was sent there while still a young boy. I made Belgium
my home and graduated from the Institute of Engineering in Liège. But all
this is beside the point. The point is there’s a war on. That’s what you need
to recognise!’
   Military music and lengthy cheers of ‘Hurrah!’ wafted in from Strastnaya
Square. Reserve battalions were forming there in preparation for leaving for
the front.
   ‘I’ve just come from the square,’ Zakharov added. ‘I had forgotten so
much about Russia. But it wasn’t my fault. Anyway, I pushed through the
crowd to the very front rows to get a good look at the soldiers. They
smelled of bread. What a smell! Listening to the Russian people, you begin
to believe no one can defeat them.’
   ‘What about Belgium?’ I asked.
   ‘What about it? I don’t understand.’
   I grinned and then said the first thing that came to mind: ‘And why do the
Belgians fight so fearlessly against the Germans?’
   ‘Oh là là! They’re a small nation living on the memory of past greatness.
I respect them for this. Take Maeterlinck. A mystical poet with a misty eye
and misty ideas. The traditional Catholic God annoys him. He’s simply too
coarse for such a refined nature as Maeterlinck. And so, he replaced God
with the Great Beyond – it’s more up-to-date, more poetic. It’s also a more
deadly poison than religion itself. So be it. More importantly, Maeterlinck is
a citizen. That’s how he was raised, those are the traditions he grew up with.
And as a citizen, he picks up his rifle and shoots with his mystical fingers
just as well as any soldier in the king’s army. No one cares about
Maeterlinck the mystical-poet. But everyone cares about Maeterlinck the
citizen. So, nobody bothers with his poetry. That’s Belgium. What else is
there to say? It’s a wonderful country. It’s swept by sea breezes and is full
of happy people. People who know how to work, I’d add. What else do you
want to know about Belgium? Anything? Well, okay then, enough about
Belgium; let’s talk about things closer to home.’
   By ‘closer to home’ Zakharov meant offering me a job as a Moscow tram
driver. ‘The fact is,’ he explained, ‘practically all the conductors and drivers
have been called up, and you can’t expect a huge city to go without trams in
wartime. They’re hiring new conductors and drivers right now.’
   I was taken aback. The transition from Maeterlinck to tram drivers had
been too abrupt. Since my school days I had thought only of becoming a
writer. I had learned to view all of life’s unexpected turns as my training for
this. One had to embrace life, not try to avoid it, for this was the only way
to acquire experience, to build up that storehouse of ideas, moments,
stories, words and images that I could later draw upon. Moreover, I knew
that I couldn’t leave Mama. She needed me now. And with this offer, a job
and some money had fallen right into my hands. So I agreed. When I told
Mama and Galya about my decision, Mama let out a sigh and said that she
had never been ashamed of any sort of work and had tried to instil in us the
same attitude. Galya, however, was worried: I might be electrocuted.
   ‘I read somewhere’, she said, trembling, ‘about a circus elephant
electrocuted in a tram. Is that possible?’
   ‘Utter nonsense,’ I told her.
   I had to get out and headed for the tavern on Kudrinskaya Street. It was
filled with steam from the samovars. A mechanical instrument, a sort of
organ referred to as the ‘machine’, was wildly churning away, its little bells
and drums clanging like mad, and playing an old folk song: ‘Away the
troika races, along the wintry ice of the Mother Volga . . .’
   At the table next to me sat an old man in a jacket with a turned-up collar.
He was busy writing something. He constantly dipped his quill in an
inkwell, picked off little bits of fuzz, and then got back to writing. I felt like
writing to one of my family members, or a friend, about myself, about how
my life had changed so unexpectedly, about how I was going to be working
as a driver on a tram, but in an instant I realised I had no one to write to.
The ‘machine’ roared on – ‘The coachman fell silent, and angrily shoved
the long whip back beneath his belt . . .’
   So great was the noise that the empty glasses on the tables began to rattle
and ring.


1Maurice Maeterlinck (1862–1949), Symbolist playwright, poet, essayist,
winner of the Nobel Prize in Literature (1911); Georges Rodenbach (1855–
98), journalist, poet and novelist remembered for his writings on life in
Belgium.
2Respectively, the country estates of the princes Yusupov and the counts
Sheremetev.

                           OceanofPDF.com
42
The Copper Line



I was taken on as a driver and posted to the Miussky tram depot, but I
didn’t last long in that position. Soon I was made a conductor.
   The Miussky yard was located on Lesnaya Street in a series of red-brick
buildings covered in thick soot. Ever since those days I have disliked
Lesnaya Street. I still consider it one of the dirtiest and ugliest in Moscow.
My memory of the street is tied to the screech of trams as they crawled out
of the depot’s iron gates at dawn, the strap of my heavy conductor’s satchel
cutting into my shoulder and the sour smell of copper coins. The coins
turned every conductor’s hands green from handling them all day,
especially if one had to work the ‘Copper Line’.
   The Copper Line was the name we gave to the B Line, which ran along
the Garden Ring. None of us conductors liked the line, even though
Muscovites affectionately called it ‘the Bug’. We preferred to work on the
‘Silver Line’ – the A Line – on the Boulevard Ring. Muscovites had a pet
name for this line as well – ‘Annushka’ they called it. That name was fine
with us, but we found ‘the Bug’ ridiculous.
   The Bug served the crowded railway station squares on the dusty edges
of Moscow. Its cars had trailers for passengers with large and heavy items.
Most of the passengers were from the outskirts of the city – craftsmen,
market gardeners, women selling milk. They paid in coppers, saving their
silver and taking it out of their pockets and purses only reluctantly. Thus,
the name ‘Copper Line’. The A Line was much smarter, serving the theatres
and finer shops. The trams were all motorised – none were horse-drawn –
and the passengers were different to those on the Bug – mostly well-
educated urban types and state officials. The typical passenger paid in silver
or bank-notes. Through the open windows of the A Line tram you could
hear the rustling of the trees which lined the boulevards. The tram slowly
circled the centre of Moscow, past the bronze figures of a weary Gogol and
a serene Pushkin, past the Trubny Market with its incessant twittering of
birds, past the Kremlin towers, past the enormous golden-headed bulk of
Christ the Saviour Cathedral and the curved bridges over the shallow waters
of the Moscow River.
   We took the trams out in the early morning and returned after midnight or
later. Back at the depot I had to hand over the daily receipts, after which I
could go home. I liked to slowly wander the dark streets of Moscow,
making my way down Bolshaya Gruzinskaya Street with my empty satchel
over my shoulder. The nickel-plated badge with my conductor’s number
that I wore on my jacket glinted in the green light of the gas lamps. In those
days only the main streets had electric lights.
   At first, I took a long time to count the coppers before I could leave for
home, but then Babaev – the old conductor who trained me – taught me
how to get rid of them. From then on I returned to the depot at the end of
my shift with nothing but large notes and some silver. The trick was quite
simple. A couple of hours before returning to the yard we did everything
possible to get rid of our small coins – change for a rouble we handed out
only in copper and for three roubles, silver. Sometimes the passengers
began to curse, and when they did we immediately acquiesced in order to
avoid another avoidable quarrel in the tram. Babaev was full of such
practical wisdom.
   ‘Passengers are anxious nowadays,’ he said. ‘You have to make
allowances. You have to treat them kindly, and you even have to let some of
them ride for free. I, for example, can tell right away when someone gets on
if they don’t want to pay. It’s written on their face. You can see they need
the ride, but they’re hiding from you in the back of the car – it’s obvious
they haven’t got a single kopeck in their pocket. So don’t force that
passenger to buy a ticket. Act as if you’ve already sold them one, even
making sure it was properly clipped. Being kind is always the right thing to
do, and especially in our walk of life as conductors. We’re dealing with the
entire city of Moscow. And there’s more human sorrow in Moscow than
there are grains of sand on the beach.’
   Babaev taught me all the basic things I needed to know for my job as a
conductor – how to clip tickets, the different colours of the tickets for each
day of the week (to stop passengers from using those of the previous day),
how to turn in the car at the end of the day to the depot supervisor, the parts
of the city where the passengers liked to hop off the moving tram and so
you had to be extra careful in stopping the tram to avoid an accident. My
training with Babaev lasted ten days, after which I took the conductor’s
examination. The most difficult part was the geography of Moscow. We had
to know every square, street and lane, every theatre, railway station, church
and market. And not only know them by name but be able to say how to go
from one to the other. No one knew Moscow better than us, except perhaps
the droshky drivers. It is thanks to my work as a conductor that I got to
know Moscow so well, this confused and diverse city with all its inns,
taverns, hospitals and poorhouses, its districts, neighbourhoods and endless
confusion of tangled streets.
   The examiner was a rather caustic old man in a full-skirted coat. He
would ask us in a mild voice as he sipped his cold tea: ‘Now then, my good
fellow, what’s the quickest route from Marina Roshcha to Khamovniki? Eh?
What’s that? You don’t know, do you? By the way, do you happen to know
how it got such an awful name – Khamovniki? “Kham”, why, that’s a boor,
a lout, that’s what that is. Now, Moscow isn’t known as a boorish place.
Moscow was Russia’s first capital, after all! It’s just scandalous!’
   The old man picked on us mercilessly. Half of us failed. Those who did
went to complain to Chief Engineer Polivanov, a marvellously groomed
gentleman with exquisite manners. With a slight tilt of the head, his silver
hair parted neatly down the middle, Polivanov answered that knowledge of
Moscow was essential to a conductor.
   ‘A conductor is not just an animated ticket dispenser, but a guide to
Moscow as well. It’s a huge city. Not even old Muscovites know all of it.
Just imagine the mess that would result if our conductors could not help
passengers, especially those from out of town, find their way in this
dizzying network of blind alleys, gates and churches.’
   I soon realised that Polivanov was right.
   I was assigned to Line 8 – the accursed railway station line, considered
even worse than the B Line. This line connected Brestsky station with the
three railway stations on Kalanchevskaya Square (Nikolaevsky,
Yaroslavsky and Kazansky) and also ran through Sukharevskaya Square
and along both New and Old Bozhedomka Streets. At Yaroslavsky station
the tram was often ‘over-run’, as we conductors liked to say, by the train
arriving from the Holy Trinity Monastery of St Sergius. The tram would be
crammed with religious pilgrims and impecunious believers. Not knowing
Moscow at all, these God-fearing old women wandered aimlessly from one
church to another. The city left them as terrified and flustered as a brood of
hens.
   Day after day it was the same old story: one poor woman needed to go to
the Church of St Nicholas the Miracle Worker on Chicken’s Feet, another to
the Church of the Life-Giving Trinity of Little Droplets and a third to the
Church of St George on the Edge of the Field. You had to explain to the old
woman very slowly and carefully how to get to each and every church, after
which she pulled a handkerchief from a pocket in one of her underskirts.
The handkerchief was always tied into thirds: one held her kopecks, another
her two-kopeck coins, and the last her five-kopeck pieces.
   She tugged and tugged at the tight knots with her teeth for a long time
and then reluctantly counted out the fare. In her haste she often picked the
wrong corner of the handkerchief. Then she had to tie it up tight again with
her teeth and start on another. It was misery for us conductors. We were
supposed to have handed out all the tickets by the time we reached Krasnye
Vorota, but the old women were so slow that we never managed in time.
The tram inspectors waiting at Krasnye Vorota, always on the lookout for
the slightest mistake, fined us for working too slowly.
   Once Babaev took me to his home. He lived with his daughter in a
ramshackle little house near Paveletsky station. His daughter worked as a
seamstress.
   ‘Sanya, look here, I’ve brought you a fine young man,’ Babaev bellowed
cheerfully from the door.
   I could hear her rummaging about behind a calico partition, but Sanya
did not come out. A few cages covered with newspaper hung from the low
ceiling. Babaev pulled off the newspaper to reveal several canaries that
immediately began singing and hopping about in their cages.
   ‘I find canaries restful after being around humans,’ Babaev explained.
‘Passengers feel no sense of shame before us conductors. They reveal their
worst selves to us, and so it’s not surprising we have a rather jaundiced
view of humanity.’
   Babaev was right. I don’t know why, but people saved their worst
behaviour for trams. Even courteous people became infected with
boorishness as soon as they entered. At first this surprised me, then it began
to get on my nerves, and in the end it depressed me so much that I found
myself waiting for an opportunity to quit my job and regain my former
friendly disposition towards people.
   Sanya, a gaunt young woman, came out, nodded silently, placed a
gramophone with a red trumpet on the table, wound it up and left. That was
the last I saw of her. The gramophone played an aria from Rigoletto.
Immediately the canaries fell silent and began to listen.
   ‘I got the gramophone for the canaries. I’m teaching them to sing,’
Babaev said. ‘They’re natural mimics.’ He told me that canary owners had
their own tavern in Moscow where they would meet on Sundays with their
birds for singing competitions that attracted large crowds. Even Chaliapin
and the millionaire Mamontov had come once.1 They were, of course,
important, famous men, but didn’t know the first thing about canaries. They
wanted to buy two birds for an enormous sum, but their owners, after a
series of apologies, turned them down since there was no good reason to
entrust a canary to inexperienced hands. It was easy to spoil them, and a lot
of work to keep and train them. Moreover, a canary isn’t some plaything;
the bird requires the proper handling. And so, Chaliapin and Mamontov
went away empty-handed. An angry Chaliapin sang in his booming bass as
he left, ‘As the King went off to war . . .’ Everyone rushed to grab their
prized birds and hurried out of the tavern – the canary is a nervous creature
and if frightened it may stop singing for good, and then it’s not worth a
single kopeck.
   The dry autumn was followed by incessant rains. This was the most
difficult time for us conductors. Draughty cars, floors covered with slippery
mud and torn ticket stubs, the musty smell of wet clothing, smudgy
windows, and outside, the never-ending procession of small, dark wooden
houses and rain-lashed warehouse signs. On such days everything got on
our nerves, especially the passengers’ obnoxious habit of drawing faces (for
some reason always with big noses) on the steamy windowpanes or
plastering them with wet tickets. The tram was transformed into a dirty
boarding house, its passengers a random bunch of quarrelsome boarders.
Moscow seemed to fall in upon itself. The city hid under black umbrellas
and the turned-up collars of overcoats. The streets emptied. Only the
Sukharevka Market throbbed, like some vast sea, as the dingy waves of
humanity rushed back and forth.
   The tram had to fight its way through the noisy crowds of buyers,
middlemen and sellers. Just inches from our wheels, the sound of
Vyaltseva’s alluring yet sinister voice hissed from the gramophones: ‘Hurry
on, troika, the snow is light and fluffy, and the night dark and cold!’2 The
music faded away, lost in the triumphant roar of the Primus stoves which,
thrusting their whistling blue flames into the sky, submerged every last
sound.
   Damp mandolin strings jangled. Little toy rubber devils with enamelled
crimson cheeks deflated towards their inevitable death: ‘Away! Away!’ they
wheezed. Pancakes sizzled in enormous frying pans. The air smelled of
horse dung, mutton, hay and carpenters’ glue. Raspy voices haggled,
followed by the loud slap of hands shaken over hard-fought bargains. Carts
clattered. The thick, steamy breath of sweaty horses filled the trams’
platforms. Chinese jugglers squatting on the streets shouted out in falsetto
voices: ‘Foo-foo! Abracadabra!’ Church bells clanged, and from under the
black gate of the Sukharev Tower a sobbing woman’s voice cried out: ‘Lay
your pale hand on my withered breast.’ Pickpockets swarmed about, a pair
of trousers slung over one arm as though for sale. Their eyes were quick
and evasive. Police whistles blew like nightingales. Shabby pigeons,
released from inside the shirt fronts of little boys, beat their heavy wings,
climbing into the muddy sky.
   It is impossible to capture in words this gigantic Moscow bazaar that
stretched practically from Samotëka to Krasnye Vorota. You could buy
everything there – from a three-wheeled vélocipède to icons, from Siamese
fighting fish to Tambov ham and cloudberry preserves. Yet all of it was
somehow damaged, rusted, full of worm-holes or a bit smelly.
   Gathered here were beggars, tramps, crooks, thieves and pedlars from
every part of the Russian Empire – poor, scruffy, shifty people. The very air
of the Sukharevka seemed to be filled with nothing but the hunger for easy
money and a helping of calves’ foot jelly. It was an unimaginable gathering
of people from every epoch and condition – from the ‘holy fool’ with
downcast eyes, clanking his rusty fetters and trying to catch a ride without
buying a ticket, to the poet with the billygoat beard and green velours hat,
from Tolstoyans, their bare feet red from the Sukharev mud, to corseted
ladies who, as they crossed this same mud, made certain to lift their heavy
skirts.
   One dark rainy day a man in a black hat, a tightly buttoned-up coat and
brown kid gloves entered my car on Yekaterinskaya Square. His long, well-
groomed face expressed a stony indifference to the Moscow slush, the
tram’s squabbling passengers, me and everything else in the world. Yet he
was most civil, this man: having received his ticket, he actually tipped his
hat and thanked me. The other passengers were left dumbfounded by this,
and they stared at this strange man with hostile curiosity. When he exited at
Krasnye Vorota, the entire carriage unleashed a storm of jeers. ‘Herr von
Baron’ they called him, and ‘Russia’s greatest forgotten actor’. I too was
curious about this passenger with his haughty yet shy expression and the
clear mixture of an accentuated refinement and provincial affectation.
   A few days later I had an evening off and went to the Polytechnical
Museum for a literary recital by the poet Igor Severyanin. ‘What was my
surprise’, as writers used to say, when out onto the stage walked my
passenger in a black frock coat. He leaned against the wall and, having
lowered his eyes, stood waiting a good long while until all the excited
shouting and applause died down. Dark red roses rained down at his feet,
but he didn’t bother to move and did not pick up a single one. Finally, he
took a step forward, the hall fell silent, and I sat listening to the slightly
burred singing of his verses that were filled with music and the mood of the
salons:

       Champagne in a lily! Champagne in a lily!
       It sparkles and shines with chastity.
       Mignon and Escamillo! Mignon and Escamillo!
       Champagne in a lily – ’tis a sacred wine.3

   There was a certain magic in this, in the sing-song of these verses that
had melody but no real meaning. It was language as music with no other
demands upon it. Thought was replaced by the shimmer of sequins and the
touch of perfumed satin, by the languid swaying of ostrich fans and the
effervescence of champagne.
   It was strange and outrageous to hear such words when thousands of
Russian peasants were standing in trenches, up to their waists in mud,
holding back the well-aimed gunfire of the advancing German army. And
yet here was Lotarëv, the former realist writer from Cherepovets and now
the ‘genius’ Igor Severyanin, chanting in a French accent lines about
lovesick Nellie in her boudoir. In the end, he caught himself and began to
sing a few affected verses about the war and how, were the last Russian
commander to die, then he, Severyanin, ‘our one and only, shall lead us all
to Berlin’.
   Such is life that even a drop of poetry can redeem the most insincere of
men, and Severyanin had a good deal more than that in him. In later years
he began to dispose of this frippery, and his voice became more human. The
clean air of the countryside found its way into his poetry and its affectation
was replaced by a lyrical simplicity: ‘What tenderness ineffable, what
warmth of heart enazures and endawns your face.’

                                      •

I had few evenings off. My days were filled with gruelling work that
stretched into the night, always on my feet, teeth clenched, hurrying the
entire time. All of us conductors found it exhausting. When we had reached
our limit, we asked our bosses to let us work for a few days on the
‘steamer’ – this is what we called the steam tram that ran from Savëlovsky
station to the Petrovsko-Razumovskaya Agricultural Academy. The work
here was the easiest of all the lines. It was the closest thing to what we
conductors called ‘country leave’ that existed in Moscow.
   The little steam engine, rather like a samovar, was hidden along with the
funnel in a metal box. The only thing that gave away its presence was a
feeble little whistle and some puffs of steam. It pulled four suburban
carriages which were lit at night by candles since the ‘steamer’ had no
electricity.
   I worked on the line that autumn. I quickly handed out the tickets and
then sat down on the open platform, mindlessly watching the beauty of the
season flow past. My face felt damp from the remaining leaves in the stands
of birch and aspen. These groves were followed by a blaze of colour from
the academy’s magnificent park. A golden stillness hung over it. The
massed lime trees and maples, together with the lemon-yellow aspens,
spread out before my eyes like the gateway to some luxuriant and peaceful
realm. Here the many colours and textures of autumn had been subjugated
to human will and talent. The entire park had been laid out by our finest
botanists, true masters of the art of landscape.
   Ever since childhood I had been under the power of a single passion – the
love of nature. At times this passion became so intense it frightened my
family. When I returned to school in the autumn from the Bryansk woods
and Crimea, I was overcome by a painful longing to go back. I couldn’t
sleep and appeared to be withering away before everyone’s eyes. I tried to
hide my condition, for I knew it would provoke nothing but bewilderment.
It was proof of my ‘thoughtless attitude to life’, which, according to my
loved ones, characterised me and would always hold me back. How could I
explain to them that my feeling for nature was more than just a sense of
wonder at its perfection, more than a mere aesthetic enjoyment; rather it
was an acknowledgement of that environment without which our full
potential could not be realised. Most people think of nature as an escape, as
a holiday. For me, life in nature ought to be our permanent condition.
   I recall this now because back in the autumn of 1914 my feeling of
connection to the natural world was unusually strong. Nature was also
under attack by the war, not here, in Moscow, but there, in the west, in
Poland, and this made my love for it all the stronger.
   I watched the smoke from the funnel of the ‘steamer’ drift across the
yellowing groves. Just beyond, in the evenings, the faint bluish glow of
Moscow could be seen. The sight of these trees on the far edge of the city
conjured up all sorts of thoughts about Russia, about Chekhov, Levitan, the
Russian spirit, about the creative talents buried in our people, their past and
their future, which, no doubt, was certain to astound us all.


1 Fëdor Chaliapin (1873–1938), famed opera singer; Savva Mamontov
(1841–1918), industrialist and arts patron.
2 Anastasia Vyaltseva (1871–1913), popular mezzo-soprano known as the
‘Queen of the Gramophone’.
3  From ‘Champagne Polonaise’ (1912) by Igor Lotarëv (pen name
Severyanin) (1887–1941), one of the Ego-Futurist poets. The line ‘What
tenderness ineffable’ on page 318 comes from his ‘Trait upon Trait’ (1914).

                              OceanofPDF.com
43
To One Side of the War



Now that almost half a century has passed since the First World War, I
think of those still relatively recent days as a distant past, as if shrouded in
the mists of legend. A thunderous century seems to lie in between, splitting
our lives in two. Everything has shifted. Everything has moved, as though
displaced by a sudden blow. Now we are amused by what we once
considered important. We are indulgent towards our former thoughtlessness
and towards our inability to make sense of life’s cunning designs, of our
relationships and of our own selves. Now we think of everything prior to
1917 as our childhood, even though by then the men and women of my
generation were already in their twenties.
   The war of 1914 did not possess our consciousness so completely as
would all that was to come later. In Russia at that time there was a margin
of life that continued off to one side of the war. The hall of the
Polytechnical Museum filled to bursting every time the Futurists or Igor
Severyanin performed. Everyone was fascinated with Rabindranath Tagore.
The Moscow Arts Theatre convulsed with agony as it searched for a new
Hamlet. In Moscow, the ‘literary Wednesdays’ continued at the home of the
writer Teleshov, although the writers at these gatherings rarely discussed the
war. Religious philosophy, God-seeking, symbolism, calls to revive
Hellenic philosophy – all this coexisted with progressive revolutionary
thought and sought to win over converts.
   My family belonged to the middling stratum of the intelligentsia. My
father was a statistician. Like most statisticians of the time, Father had been
a liberal. From my earliest childhood I heard Father and his friends talk
about freedom, about the inevitability of revolution, and about the wretched
condition of the people. These discussions invariably took place over tea at
the dining room table, and every time Mama would alert the men with her
eyes to the presence of us children as she said to Father: ‘Georgy, you’re
getting carried away, as always.’
   To me, ‘the people’, those suffering, beaten-down millions, meant the
peasants. I had heard little of the workers. In our circles one rarely used the
term ‘the proletariat’. Sometimes people spoke of ‘artisans’ and ‘factory
hands’, and these words conjured up for me the industrial outskirts of Kiev,
crowded barracks and strikes.
   Every time I heard these words – ‘the proletariat’ and ‘the working class’
– for some reason I had the impression that the only proletariat in Russia
was to be found in sooty Petrograd, and then only in a few enormous
factories, such as the Putilov or Obukhov steel works. Such naïve childish
notions and my passion for literature meant that up until the February
Revolution I didn’t know the first thing about the revolutionary movement.
   The word ‘revolutionary’ meant nothing more to me than someone
terribly brave, unbending and selfless. Not that I had been completely
ignorant of the revolutionary movement in my youth. I had witnessed the
events of 1905, knew well the details of the December uprising in Moscow,
the story of the Moscow–Kazan Railway, and the mutinies on the
battleships Potëmkin and Ochakov, and I bowed my head before Lieutenant
Schmidt. Nevertheless, it was chiefly the romance of it all that excited me –
the secret underground printing presses, dynamite, infernal machines,
escapes from Siberian exile, fiery speeches. As for the larger significance, I
had nothing but a vague notion that could be summed up as ‘the struggle for
freedom’.
   I lived with these ideas up until the outbreak of war in 1914. Only then
did I begin to comprehend the larger social forces at work in Russia. In
1914, Moscow was far away from the front. The only reminders of the war
were the great many wounded men in brown hospital gowns wandering
about the city and women in mourning. One evening I got up the courage to
attend one of the ‘literary Wednesdays’. The writers met in an old mansion
in a quiet lane near Bolshaya Gruzinskaya Street. I took a seat in the back
row and didn’t get up until the end of the evening. I was afraid someone
would notice and ask me to leave, just like some ticketless passenger, even
though I was surrounded by a number of young men and women no
different to myself. They all behaved as if they belonged there, which only
made me feel more out of place.
   My face was hot – I had never been this close to real writers before. I
could not shake off the thought that even though they were all dressed in
ordinary clothes and spoke the same words as all the rest of us mere
mortals, still an enormous gulf separated us. This gulf was called talent, a
mastery over ideas, images and words – everything, in short, that at the time
I believed to be a kind of magic. I looked upon each and every one of these
writers as the direct heirs of Turgenev, Chekhov and Tolstoy, the appointed
guardians of the traditions of Russian literature.
   Back then I could not accept Pushkin’s words that writers and poets were
at times the greatest scoundrels in the world. I was unable to separate the
author from his body of work. And so it was with equal excitement that I
gazed at Alexei Tolstoy’s coachman’s haircut, at the tousled head of Ivan
Shmelëv, who looked like a land surveyor, at the meek face of Zaitsev and
at the icy Bunin, who was reading his story ‘The Psalm’ in a monotone.1
   I had hoped to see Maxim Gorky at this ‘Wednesday’, but he wasn’t
there. Sitting next to me was a consumptive old man who appeared to be
made up entirely of wrinkles. He coughed the whole time into a dark
handkerchief and his eyes glistened – he apparently had a fever. He was
following every word spoken by the writers seated before us on a platform
and would turn to me, saying: ‘Oh, isn’t Russia wonderful! Oh, just
wonderful!’
   We left together. He lived out beyond Presnenskaya Square, in the same
direction as me, and so we walked along side by side. A grey moon shone
through the bare trees. Frozen leaves crunched under our feet. Light from
the windows fell on my companion’s pork-pie astrakhan hat. It turned out
he was a typesetter at Sytin’s.2 His name was Yelisey Sverchkov.
   ‘I was born in the provinces,’ he said, stopping for a minute to cough. ‘In
the town of Kashin. I always wanted to be a writer, but I don’t have the skill
for it. Words simply don’t come to me. I have a good feel for words, you
might say, I know their nuances, their subtleties, but I can’t marshal them
into any proper order. There are many meanings hidden in every word, and
it’s the writer’s job to place one word next to another in just such a way, my
young man, that it will strike the right note in the reader’s heart. That’s
where talent comes in. Inspiration! A writer doesn’t search for words,
doesn’t select them – he seizes on the necessary word in an instant, just as a
typesetter grabs the necessary letter from his tray without having to look.
And once he’s put it there, not even the devil himself could make him give
it up, for if he did the entire beautiful edifice would come crashing down.’
   ‘Have you tried to write?’ I asked the typesetter.
   ‘I’ve tried and tried. And I’m still trying. But it’s no use. I have this habit
– on my days off I visit either the Tretyakov or the Rumyantsev Gallery. I
pick one painting I like and look at it and try to place myself inside it, as if I
were a participant in what’s being depicted. Take, for example, Savrasov’s
The Rooks Have Come Back.3 Or Levitan’s March. My entire childhood is
captured in Savrasov’s painting. A slushy Russian spring, puddles, a cold
wind, low clouds, wet fences. Levitan’s March is another kind of spring,
although still unmistakably ours, truly very Russian – a bright blue sky over
the trees, and the drip-drip of thawing snow and melting icicles, a ray of
sunshine in every drop of water as it falls from the roof. I see it all so
clearly. And then I go home and try to recreate with words in my notebook
everything I’ve seen, to paint, as it were, with words just as the artist paints
with umber and sienna and cobalt. I want the reader to have an image in his
head that corresponds exactly with the painting, as if he’d seen it himself. I
want him to smell the manure, if you’ll excuse me, and hear the rooks. I
have done more than a hundred of these descriptions. I showed them a
while ago to a writer – I’m not going to say who. I was so nervous. It was
embarrassing. He read them and said: “Yes, it’s quite literary, and the
grammar’s fine, but what’s the point? I’d rather go and look at the paintings
myself than read your descriptions of them. What made you want to try to
compete with Savrasov, Levitan or Korovin?4 They knew what they were
doing. You’re not going to teach them anything.”
   ‘I tried to explain: “Well, I had this idea of developing the written word
to such a point that it would have a visual effect on the reader, just like the
way an artist uses paint on a canvas.”
   ‘“That’s the dumbest thing I’ve ever heard,” he said.
   ‘With that I walked away. Still, I did learn one thing: I have no talent for
writing! It’s a pity, but true. If I did, I’m certain I could create some
amazing works.’
   I accompanied the typesetter home. He lived at the back of a narrow
courtyard that was piled high with rusty old bedsteads. There was a
bedstead manufactory in one of the building’s wings. Sverchkov asked me
to come and visit sometime and then added: ‘I live here surrounded by
beds, yet I sleep on a broken-down old trestle board. These here are all old.
They were donated. They’ll be fixed up and distributed to military
hospitals. On account of the war. I don’t understand this war. It’s the result
of a lack of basic friendship among people. If ordinary people like us just
got together and said in one voice “No!”, well, that would put an end to all
this bloody business. That’s my dream – that someone will come along and
teach us how to be friends. Is it possible there’s no one on earth who could
do that?’
   He rapped on a little window. No one responded, but I heard a woman
burst into angry sobs.
   ‘She doesn’t understand!’ sighed Sverchkov. ‘The weaker sex. I’ve got
no more than a year to live, but she just doesn’t understand. You’ll have to
excuse me, young man.’
   I said goodbye and left. It was so quiet out on Bolshaya Presnya Street
that you could hear the yawns of the night watchmen. The tiled shopfronts
of Chichkin’s and Blandov’s dairies, one white, the other blue, gleamed
softly in the lamplight. Whenever Chichkin opened one of his white-tiled
shops, Blandov was sure to open a blue-tiled shop just opposite in the hope
of stealing his customers.
   Everyone was already asleep at home. Even Zakharov’s room was dark. I
went to my room and lay down on the floor. The gaslight outside shone
faintly through my window.
   I lay there thinking about the typesetter from Kashin. My thoughts didn’t
upset me, rather they brought with them a feeling of peace. It was clear
there were so many exceptionally talented men and women in this country.
No one knew how many of them there were scattered about in Russia’s
towns and villages. Tens of thousands? Hundreds of thousands? How much
thought, energy and time they gave to improving, enriching, celebrating and
glorifying their country.
   The typesetter had been right, of course – you could perform miracles
with the Russian language. There was nothing in our experience, no thought
or sensation, that couldn’t be expressed in Russian. Music, colours, light,
the rustling shadows of gardens, the ambiguity of dreams, the rumbling of
storms, the whisper of children, the crash of waves along the beach – for all
this and more we could find in our language the exact expression.
   It’s easy to think in the city at night, when the only sounds are the distant
whistling of trains or the occasional clatter of a passing droshky over the
cobblestones. I got up, went over to the window and stood staring for a long
time at the Zoological Garden. It looked like a giant black island
surrounded by the dimly lit streets of Moscow. I turned round and saw a
patch of white on the table. I thought it must be a note from Mama. I picked
it up, lit a match and read the uneven lines of a telegram from Kiev:

  Posted to sapper unit leaving for western front address to follow will
  write more when able don’t worry kisses to you Galya Kostik Borya

   So now Borya was off as well! I was suddenly overcome with shame.
Why had I felt so superior to him? Just because of my woolly attraction to
art? Not having written a single worthwhile line, for some reason I already
considered myself among the elect. I had laughed at his room, his concrete
bridges, his down-to-earth philosophy. But what was funny about it? At
least he was honest. He worked like an ox, never lied and never dodged his
obligations. So what if he preferred Henryk Sienkiewicz to Chekhov? Was
there some sin in this? I, who had been such an enemy of other people’s
prejudices, had fallen under the sway of the pettiest of prejudices.
   I lit a second match and read the telegram once more. I wondered: why
had Mama not waited up for me instead of leaving the telegram on my
table? Why? Could it be because she knew what I thought of Borya, and she
couldn’t bear to see it written on my face at such a difficult moment?
   I got dressed and went to see Mama. She was not asleep. I sat down next
to her and stroked her dry grey hair, at a loss as to how I might try to
comfort her. She cried softly so as not to wake Galya.
   I realised then how cruel and unjust young people can be, even if their
heads are filled with lofty ideas.
   Mama didn’t fall asleep until dawn. I went back to my room, put on my
conductor’s uniform, grabbed my empty satchel and tiptoed out. A dim
light filtered through the dirty windows onto the stairs. I picked my way
down through the old tomcats that lay splayed out asleep on the steps. Two-
wheeled hospital carts, with red crosses painted on their green tarpaulins,
rumbled down Bolshaya Gruzinsksya Street on their way to the Brestsky
goods station. Crinkly dry leaves from the lilac trees in the Zoological
Garden were being driven along the pavement. Big drops of a heavy
morning rain began to fall, drumming on the carts’ roofs and drenching the
dusty leaves.
1 Alexei Tolstoy (1882–1945), prolific writer, distant relation of Leo
Tolstoy, later supporter of the Soviet regime; Ivan Shmelëv (1873–1950),
writer and publisher, emigrated in 1922; Boris Zaitsev (1881–1972), writer
and dramatist, also emigrated in 1922.
2   Ivan Sytin (1851–1934), prominent Moscow publisher.
3 Alexei Savrasov (1830–97), painter, member of the Peredvizhniki
(Wanderers) group.
4   Konstantin Korovin (1861–1939), Russian Impressionist painter.

                              OceanofPDF.com
44
The Old Man with the Hundred-Rouble Ticket



It’s an old truth that people who are always on the move – engine drivers,
sailors, pilots, chauffeurs – tend to be rather superstitious. And so were we,
the conductors of the Moscow tramway system.
    We were most superstitious when it came to an old man with a hundred-
rouble note, the so-called Katerinka. The note was engraved with a
magnificent portrait of Catherine the Great in a tight satin bodice.
    To be fair, the old man was in fact quite pleasant – clean, kind and well
mannered. In the pocket of his overcoat he always carried a perfectly folded
copy of the Russian News, the beloved newspaper of the liberal upper
classes.
    The old man always boarded the tram early in the morning just as we
were pulling out of the park and had nothing more than sixty kopecks of
change on us. We were never given any more than that to start our day. He
always got on and smiled impishly as he handed his hundred-rouble note to
the conductor. Of course, the conductor never had enough change. But the
old man never made a fuss and just quietly got off at the first stop and
waited for the next tram.
    The same interaction repeated itself with the following tram. And so,
getting on and then off one tram after another, the old man rode to work for
free day after day, month after month. There was nothing we could do about
it.
    It was always the exact same hundred-rouble note. We, the conductors
working Line 8, had memorised its serial number – 123715. Sometimes we
lost our temper with the old man and said: ‘Present your “Katerinka”
123715 and then get off.’ The old man was never offended. He happily
presented the banknote to the conductor and then just as happily left the
tram, hurrying so as not to be a bother to anyone. Such deviousness to avoid
purchasing a ticket was unprecedented, yet even the fiercest of the
conductors was helpless to stop him. But the reason we disliked the old man
was not because of that ‘Katerinka’ but because, according to all the
longtime conductors who had known him for years, he always brought bad
luck. I experienced this myself four times while working on the trams. My
first job, as a driver on the B Line, was awful. The trams had trailers, and
the couplings were so old and worn that it was impossible to start up
without jolting the trailers, which was always followed by loud curses from
the passengers.
   One day a white Chichkin milk truck cut in front of me on Smolensky
Boulevard. It then proceeded to drive straight down the tracks, but
exceedingly slowly, as if the driver feared spilling his load. I had no option
but to slow right down as well, and soon was arriving late at all my stops,
now crowded with angry passengers. It wasn’t long before another B tram
caught up with me, followed by a second, then a third and finally even a
fourth. All of them began rattling furiously. In those days, motorised trams
had electric rattles, not horns. The entire line was jammed, but the milk
driver just drove on in front of me and refused to clear off the rails.
   And so we went down the entire length of Sadovaya-Kudrinskaya Street,
past Tverskaya Street, Malaya Dmitrovka Street and Karetny Row. I rattled
like mad, leaned out and cursed, but the driver’s only response was a few
puffs of tobacco smoke from his window. By now the row of ‘Bugs’,
packed with passengers and rattling around the Garden Ring, stretched as
far as the eye could see. The drivers’ cursing shook the air. The wave of
noise started at the very last tram, broke over me, and then rolled back in a
mighty wave.
   Driven to despair, I knew I had to act. As we started down the slope at
Samotëka I switched the engine off and, gesticulating as though my brakes
had failed, let the tram run free. With a deafening crash, we ploughed into
the back of Chichkin’s milk truck. There was a sound something like a
gunshot, and then the truck ended up on its side, pouring white smoke. The
whiskered driver climbed out, pulled a police whistle from his pocket and
began to blow with all his might. I had not seen this coming. Suddenly, two
policemen, clutching their swords, began racing across Samotëchnaya
Square towards the tram. The next day I found myself demoted from driver
to conductor.
   But this wasn’t the end of my misadventures. Soon after I was fined for
sitting on the rear platform as we crossed Teatralnaya Square. Conductors
were expected to stand here since the square was one of the busiest spots in
Moscow and passengers were always hopping on and off even while the
tram was in motion.
    Some of us young conductors came up with a plan to get in a little rest on
what was always an insanely busy day. It seemed clever at the time, but we
were quite mistaken. We convinced the drivers to leave the last stop two or
three minutes ahead of schedule and not be bothered with ‘maintaining the
proper interval’ as mandated. The driver went at full speed until he caught
up with the tram in front. We watched as all the waiting passengers climbed
into that tram and we proceeded on empty and quiet. We could even sit
down and read the newspaper. It seemed foolproof. But there was the
proverbial banana skin. The plan was working so well that we decided to
take three or four circuits around Moscow at a time to avoid having to pick
up any passengers. Soon, our takings fell way below those of the other
conductors. Our bosses became suspicious. In the end, they caught onto our
little game and slapped us with heavy fines.
    None of these troubles could be attributed to the old man with the
hundred-rouble note. Yet one day he entered my carriage and his
appearance struck me as more suspicious and threatening than ever – the
old man was positively beaming at me. Perhaps this was because I had
overlooked him, and he had managed to ride two stops for free. After he got
off, the driver, a taciturn and morose fellow, slid open the door of his cabin
with a loud screech and shouted down the length of the carriage to me:
‘Conductor, open your eyes! Look out for some sort of trouble!’ And then
he slammed the door shut.
    I kept a lookout for trouble the entire rest of the day, but nothing
happened. I calmed down. At midnight we rolled out of Yaroslavsky station
on our last round. The tram was almost empty, and everything seemed fine.
I began humming a popular tune to myself: ‘Tell me, little birdie! Have you
got some change for me . . .’
    At Orlikov Lane a stout gentleman in an overcoat with a fashionable roll
collar and an elegant bowler got on. Everything about him spoke of wealth
and status: his slightly puffy eyes, the smell of fragrant cigar smoke, the
white silk muffler of foreign make, the walking stick with a silver knob. He
walked down the entire length of the tram, leaning heavily on his stick and
moving uncomfortably like someone with gout, and then dropped into a
seat by the exit. I went over to him.
   ‘Free travel!’ the man said curtly. He didn’t bother looking at me, but
was staring out of the window at the lights of the city.
   ‘Your pass!’ I said, just as curtly.
   He raised his puffy eyes and gave me a look of contempt. ‘You ought to
know who you’re dealing with, young man,’ he said angrily. ‘I’m Mayor
Bryansky.’
   ‘Unfortunately, it’s not written on your forehead,’ I shot back. ‘Show me
your pass!’
   The mayor flew into a temper and refused. I stopped the tram and asked
him to get out. He refused to budge. At this point, the other passengers
graciously decided to weigh in on the matter.
   ‘He’s no mayor!’ came a mocking voice from far back in the tram. ‘The
mayor has his own carriage and pair. Everyone knows that. Some mayor he
is!’
   ‘Mind your own business!’ shouted the man in the bowler.
   ‘Heavens! What a loud voice he has!’ an old woman with a bag of apples
said nervously. ‘The rich are all like that – too cheap to spend five kopecks
on a ticket. That’s how they make their pile, by saving a kopeck here and
there.’
   ‘Maybe he’s broke,’ joked a young man in a cloth cap. ‘I’ll pay for his
ticket. Here, conductor! And give him the change so he can buy himself
something to eat.’
   In the end the outraged mayor got out, slamming the door so hard behind
him that all the glass shook. For this the driver delivered a string of
comments addressed to the man in reference to his bad manners, his hat and
his fat mug.
   Two days later I was summoned by the head of the Miussky Yard, a
humorous man with an enormous red beard who said in a loud voice:
‘Conductor 217! This is your second reprimand. Sign here! Fine, and now
go and light a candle to Our Lady of Iversk for getting you off so lightly.
Who ever heard of such a thing? Tossing the mayor out of the tram! And at
night, and on Third Meshchanskaya Street no less, where a man isn’t safe
even by day!’
   He demanded that I tell him every last detail of the entire story with the
mayor. So I did, making sure to also tell him about the old man with the
hundred-rouble note and how we conductors were all convinced he was bad
luck.
    ‘I’ve heard about this old devil,’ said the head of the yard. ‘I wish we
could find some way to trip him up.’
    The conductors of Line 8 had been dreaming about this for a long time.
Each of us had our plan, including me. I told it to the yard head, and he just
laughed. Nevertheless, the next morning I was given one hundred roubles in
small notes, for which I had to sign. I waited three days for the old man. On
the fourth day, he finally appeared. Not suspecting a thing, the usual calm,
innocent smile on his face, he got in and handed me his ‘Katerinka’. I took
it, turned it over, examined it in the light, and then tucked it into my satchel.
His jaw dropped with surprise. I slowly counted out ninety-nine roubles and
ninety-five kopecks, counted it one more time to be certain, and then
handed the old man his change. He presented a terrifying sight – his face
was black with rage, and his eyes yellow with bile. I would have been
afraid to run into him in a deserted alley. He silently took the change,
stuffed it uncounted into his coat pocket, and headed towards the door.
    ‘Where are you going?’ I asked him politely. ‘You finally have a ticket.
Now you can ride as much as you like.’
    ‘Bastard!’ the old man spat. He opened the front door and got off at the
next stop, no doubt out of habit. When the tram started up, he whacked the
outside of the door as hard as he could with his heavy stick and yelled once
more: ‘Bastard! Swindler! I’ll show you!’
    I never saw him again after that. Some of the conductors, however, did
claim to have seen him again, walking briskly to his office, a neatly folded
copy of the Russian News stuck into the pocket of his overcoat. The
hundred-rouble note (serial number 123715) was mounted, like a trophy, on
a special notice board behind a wire cage typically used for official notices.
It hung there for a few days. The conductors crowded around to have a
good look at it and laugh. I gained a dubious reputation for resourcefulness.
This reputation saved me from being fired when an inspector caught me
giving a free ride to twenty armed men.
    It was nighttime. Soldiers in battle dress – with cartridge boxes, rifles and
tightly belted brand-new greatcoats – got on at Yaroslavsky station. Bearded
men with weather-beaten faces, they were reservists, fresh up from the
country and intimidated by big, unfamiliar Moscow. They were on their
way to Brestsky station, and from there to the front. Three of them were
accompanied by their wives, whose faces were muffled up to their eyes in
their shawls. They clung to their men’s coat sleeves and didn’t say a word.
Neither did the soldiers. I had committed two offences. Not only had I
allowed the soldiers and their wives to ride for free, but I had also permitted
armed men onto the tram, which was strictly forbidden.
   An inspector got on at Yekaterinskaya Square.
   ‘You needn’t bother checking,’ I told him. ‘The soldiers don’t have any
tickets.
   ‘Charging it to the king of Denmark, are you?’ he asked matter-of-factly.
   ‘Yes, that’s right, the king of Denmark.’
   ‘A nice state of affairs,’ he muttered as he took down my number and
then jumped off without waiting until the next stop.
   Soon after I was summoned again to the depot’s red-bearded head. He
looked at me for a long time, raised his eyebrows quizzically, and then
appeared to come to a decision. ‘You’, he said, dropping his usual informal
‘ty’ for the formal form of address, ‘are incapable of working with
passengers. That’s obvious! My Lord, you already have three reprimands!’
   ‘Well, fine then, fire me.’
   ‘That’d be easy. But that’s not the point. I’m going to transfer you to our
nighttime hospital service instead. You’ll pick up the wounded at the
stations and deliver them to the various hospitals. You’re a student, right?’
   I told him I was and accepted. I was grateful, for this work seemed nobler
than the exhausting daily tussle with passengers, tickets and change.
Relieved, I handed over my satchel to the foreman and went home. I walked
along Bolshaya Gruzinskaya Street. The gaslights flickered in the wind.
The night air smelled faintly of gas and seemed to presage changes, travel
and new adventures.

                              OceanofPDF.com
45
Lefortovo Nights



Bathed in the hissing, chalky incandescence of arc lights, Brestsky station
was at the time the main army transport junction for Moscow. Troops
embarked here for the front. At night, long hospital trains smelling of
chloroform moved stealthily up to its darkened platforms and unloaded
their wounded.
   Every night around two o’clock, when the city lay asleep, we drove our
white trams to Brestsky station. Special camp beds on springs had been set
up in all the cars. We had to wait a long time and hung about smoking
alongside the cars. Women in heavy shawls kept coming up and quietly
asking us if it would soon be time to load the wounded. This expression –
‘load the wounded’, meaning to haul men who, though still alive, had been
ripped to shreds, as if they were so much inanimate freight – was one of the
absurdities of the war.
   ‘Just wait!’ we told them.
   With a heavy sigh, the women went back out to wait silently in the
shadows on the street, their eyes trained on the big station doors. The
women came to the station every night in the hope of finding among the
wounded a husband, a brother, a son or someone from a regiment who
might give them news of a loved one. Despite our differences in age,
personality and political views, all of us conductors feared nothing more
than one of these women discovering a badly maimed relation among the
wounded.
   As soon as the orderlies appeared at the station doors with the stretchers,
the women swarmed around them, peering into the blackened faces of the
wounded, pressing bread, apples or cheap cigarettes into their hands. Others
just stood about sobbing. Stifling their moans, the wounded comforted them
with homespun words – the kind of words every simple Russian keeps
ready for a rainy day and shares only with others just as simple as himself.
   The men were loaded into the trams, and we started our slow, careful trip
through the Moscow night. We usually took the soldiers to the main
military hospital in Lefortovo. Ever since then Lefortovo has reminded me
of cold autumn nights. Many years have passed, but when I think of
Lefortovo now, I still picture it on just such a night, the hospital looming
out of the dark with its long, monotonous rows of lighted windows. I can’t
rid myself of this image because I have never been back to Lefortovo and I
never did see it, or the wide square in front of the hospital, in daylight.
   At Lefortovo we helped the orderlies carry the badly wounded to the
wards or out to the huts scattered about deep in the park some distance from
the main building. A noisy stream ran through a gully; it smelled of
chlorine. We had to carry the men slowly, and so we often worked at
Lefortovo until it was almost dawn.
   Sometimes we cared for wounded Austrians. We jokingly referred to
Austria at the time as the ‘Rag-and-Bone Empire’ and the Austrian army as
a ‘Gypsy bazaar’. At first glance their multi-ethnic army created the
impression of a hotch-potch of swarthy and emaciated men in blue
greatcoats and faded forage caps with tin cockades and the initials ‘F’ and
‘J’ for Emperor Franz Joseph. Talking to the wounded prisoners, we were
astounded by all the different nationalities the Austrian army contained.
There were Czechs, Germans, Italians, Tyroleans, Poles, Bosnians, Serbs,
Croats, Montenegrins, Hungarians, Gypsies, Herzegovinians, Hutsuls,
Slovaks . . . I had never even heard of some of these nationalities, even
though I had excelled in geography at school.
   One day along with a group of wounded Russians an Austrian in grey
puttees, as long and thin as a rake, was brought into my tram. He had been
wounded in the throat and lay there wheezing and rolling his yellow eyes.
As I walked past him, he moved a dirty hand. Thinking he wanted a drink
of water, I bent down to his drawn, un-shaven face and heard him whisper
in a soft rattling voice. I thought this Austrian had spoken in Russian.
Surprised, I drew back. Then, with great difficulty, he repeated himself:
   ‘I’m a Slav . . . Taken captive in a big, big battle . . . my brother.’
   He closed his eyes. Apparently, he attached great importance to what he
had said, but I didn’t understand what that might be. I had the feeling that
he had waited for just the right moment to speak these words. I thought
about it for a long time afterwards. What had this dying man with the
blood-soaked bandage on his throat been trying to tell me? Why hadn’t he
complained, or asked for a sip of water, or pulled out the metal chain
holding the regimental disc engraved with the address of his next of kin as
the other wounded Austrian prisoners did? He seemed to want to say that
the world is run by the powerful and it wasn’t his fault that he had been
forced to take up arms against his brothers. In his fevered mind this idea
was connected with the memory of some great, bloody battle to which the
‘Swabians’ had sent him straight from his village. From that village where
the centuries-old nut trees cast large shadows and where a tame Danubian
bear danced to a barrel-organ on feast days.
   When we started to carry out the wounded at Lefortovo and came to a
red-haired soldier from Vologda, he said: ‘Take the Austrian. He’s in a bad
way. We can wait.’
   We picked up the Austrian. He was heavy and began moaning softly as
we walked. ‘Oh-oh-oh, Mother Mary! Oh-oh-oh, Mother Mary!’ By the
time we reached the hut out in the garden he was dead. The military doctor
told us to take him to the morgue. This was a shed with large, wide doors.
We carried the Austrian to the morgue, lifted him off the stretcher and laid
him down on the hay which had already been flattened by the weight of so
many other dead bodies. A yellowish electric bulb hung from the ceiling.
   Trying not to look around, I pulled out the identity disc from under his
collar. It was a tiny booklet made of two hinged leaves of white oxidised
metal with three engraved lines on it: ‘Iovann Petrić, 38719, Veseli Dubnjak
(Bosnia).’ I copied it down.
   Later, back at home, I wrote a postcard (for some reason in block letters)
telling of Iovann’s death and posted it to the Petrić family in Veseli
Dubnjak, Bosnia. As I wrote I imagined a low white cottage, so low that the
windows were an arm’s length off the ground. I saw the dry burdock under
the windows and a hawk floating in the hot sky overhead. I saw a woman
take a child from her breast and gaze with gloomy eyes down the road
where the wind was kicking up dust. Perhaps the wind was blowing from
the field where Iovann lay dead and buried, but it couldn’t speak and would
never tell her anything. And no letters came.
   ‘Taken captive in a big, big battle . . . my brother.’ I recalled his rough
whisper. Whose fault was it that ‘Swabians’ in their tight green uniforms
had torn him, Iovann, away from his home? He had been obedient and
good, Iovann – you could see it in his soft, round eyes, the eyes of a boy on
the face of an old man.
   It was during those nights at Lefortovo, nights filled with war and
suffering when I first contemplated man’s tortuous path through life, that I
became a man. With every day I shed a bit more of the bright glitter that
had coloured my vision of reality. I became aware of life as something
fierce and harsh that demanded ceaseless effort to rid it of its grim ichor and
delusions and to reveal it in all its magnificence and simplicity.

                              OceanofPDF.com
46
Medical Orderly



In October 1914, I left my job with the Moscow tramway and signed up as
a medical orderly on a hospital train operated in the rear by the Union of
Cities.1 I couldn’t bear to stay in Moscow any longer. All my thoughts were
directed to the west, to the muddy battlefields of Poland where the fate of
Russia was being decided. I looked for ways to be closer to the war and
finally to escape the despondency of our shattered family.
   Almost all the orderlies on these trains were student volunteers. We wore
soldiers’ uniforms but were allowed to keep our student caps, which saved
us many a time from abuse and bullying at the hands of the officers. Each
orderly was in charge of a passenger railway carriage set up for forty
wounded men. It was a point of honour to keep one’s carriage as highly
polished as a ship’s cabin, so spotlessly clean that when old Dr Pokrovsky, a
member of the Imperial Duma, made his regular inspection before the start
of a run, he could find nothing to criticise and would be left smiling into his
auburn imperial. And this from a man who was strict and mocking.
   I was very nervous before my first trip. I didn’t know whether I would be
able to cope with looking after forty bed-ridden men. There were few
nurses on the train. We simple orderlies not only had to wash and feed all
the wounded, but also check their temperatures, monitor their dressings and
remember when to give them their medicine.
   I learned on our first run that the most difficult job was feeding the men.
The kitchen was far from my carriage. I had to haul two heavy pails with
hot cabbage soup or boiled water through forty-eight doors. The orderlies
near the kitchen had to struggle through no more than ten or so doors.
Blessed by fate in our eyes, we envied them and took malicious pleasure in
spilling soup in their carriages on our many daily trips back and forth
through the train. Down on all fours, messy rag in hand wiping up our
messes, they would swear at us as we passed by, one after another, with our
leaky pails.
   At first those forty-eight doors brought me to despair. There were
ordinary doors that one pushed or pulled and then there were folding doors
that worked like accordions. Every door had to be opened and closed, and
to do this one had to set down one’s full pails, trying not to spill anything.
The train moved fast. It swayed and shook as it went over a set of points,
and this is no doubt why to this day I can’t stand the sudden jolting that
comes with riding on trains. If this wasn’t enough, we had to hurry so the
soup or tea wouldn’t get cold, especially in winter as we scurried over the
icy open foot-plates between the carriages, a cutting wind howling and
mocking our efforts. All it took was one little slip and you’d end up under
the wheels of the train. If one considers that we had to visit the kitchen at
least a dozen times a day (for bread and crockery, for tea, for soup, for
kasha, and then back to the kitchen with the dirty dishes and empty pails,
and so on), it’s quite understandable why we cursed the long-dead designer
who had considered it wise to put as many as eight doors in each carriage.
   We thanked heaven when mealtime coincided with a stop. We would
jump out of the cars onto the platform and hurry up and down beside the
train on the solid ground with our pails, instead of over the wiggling floors.
Many of the wounded couldn’t feed themselves, and so we had to do this
for them. In the mornings we would bathe them and then wash the floors
with a mixture of water and carbolic acid. Only in the evening, after supper,
did we get to rest, but not for long for then began the nightly struggle with
the candles in their tin lanterns. The candles invariably went out, or melted
into a pile, or blazed wildly like torches. The candles over the couplings
were always being stolen by one Uncle Vasya, a stumpy brakeman with a
big nose whom we dubbed ‘Candle Snout’. None of us would have
managed all the work if at least one of the more lightly wounded soldiers
didn’t help out.
   But in fact these little troubles weren’t the real reason I feared going on
that first run. There was another, much larger problem that all of us
orderlies secretly dreaded. The real hardship, especially for us, students
exempted from military service, was to be face to face with forty maimed
men. We feared the scorn and disgust of men who had borne all the burdens
and dangers of war while we, young and for the most part healthy men,
lived in safety, lacking for nothing. As we got under way on that first run I
simply had no time to speak to the wounded or listen to their conversations.
Things finally quietened down that night. I sat down behind my partition, lit
a cigarette, and looked out of the window. Lanterns threw shafts of light
over the carriages one by one as we raced through some station. And then
once more there was nothing but the rhythmic clatter of the wheels and the
dark of night, broken here and there by the flickering lights of some
forgotten village.
   ‘Orderly!’ cried a raspy, demanding voice. ‘Orderly!’
   I jumped up and set off down the car. I had been summoned by a
wounded soldier with a puffy, brown face.
   ‘Hey you, quack, asleep, were you?’ he asked calmly, no scorn in his
voice. ‘You’re not supposed to sleep on duty. Give me a drink. Or else I’ll
lie here suffering with a parched throat all night.’
   ‘Everyone has to sleep,’ came a high, childlike voice from the next bed.
The man had a scraggy beard and a drawn face and was trying to be
conciliatory. ‘Some for eternity, some for just a while.’
   ‘What are you, some sort of monk?’ the man with the puffy face laughed.
   ‘Ah, fella, they’ve not even built a monastery yet I’d be willing to join,’
he said, smiling. ‘I’d need a special sort of monastery, one in keeping with
my views on life.’
   ‘Oh, aren’t you some special little flower!’ another man with a heavily
bandaged face said crossly. His weaselly little eyes gleamed in the slits of
his white gauze.
   ‘So here we are making fun of each other,’ the bearded man said, ‘but we
have no idea what life is really about. Or what its purpose is.’
   ‘Well, go ahead and tell us, then, don’t keep it to yourself,’ rudely
demanded the man with the puffy face. ‘What’s the point of it all, how’s it
all fit together?’
   ‘All right, I will.’ He paused. ‘There once lived here in our Russian land
an old and quite well-known man. His name was Count Tolstoy. He wrote
so many books it was said that his right hand began to tingle and go numb.
It hurt, his hand did, and so he always went around with it tucked in his
belt. I guess this made it feel better, it didn’t hurt so much.’
   ‘That’s true,’ said the man with the bandaged face. ‘I’ve seen it myself in
photographs.’
   ‘There’s nothing worse than when an arm or leg falls asleep,’
corroborated the puffy man. He shifted uncomfortably in his bed to make
room for me. ‘Have a seat, orderly. I woke you up so you might as well sit
with us a while and have a listen.’
   ‘It’s wrong to wake a man for no good reason,’ came a sleepy voice from
deep in the car. ‘It sours the blood.’
   ‘Shut up, you! We’re talking here!’ shouted the puffy man.
   ‘Yes, yes,’ the other fellow went on with the story, licking his lips. ‘The
old man was a bit dried up and his name was Leo. And the name fitted, for
it seems, as people tell, he had the strength of a lion. His brain, I mean, of
course, his intelligence. His body wasn’t anything unusual, he wasn’t even
tall. Well, so, we had this painter who lived in our village, name of Koler,
and once he happened to get into a dispute with this Count Tolstoy. Not so
much a dispute, I guess, but more of a conversation. Koler was sitting
waiting for a train at some station Lord knows where, just a little way south
of Moscow, I think, and he was waiting and waiting. He waited more than
an entire day for a train. It was summer, hot and dusty, and the station
completely empty, nobody there at all. And then Count Tolstoy showed up
and he too sat down to wait for a train.
   ‘Naturally, they asked where the other was heading. Koler said: “As for
me, I’m making my way to the south, to Odessa, because I’m sick and tired
of painting around here.”
   ‘“Why’s that?” Tolstoy asked him.
   ‘“Because up here they all paint their houses dark colours, and down
there, light ones. And that’s much more cheerful. All you need to use down
there is plain whitewash – Kreide, chalk, they call it in those parts – and as
long as it’s put on clean and smooth, then that house will sparkle like a
gemstone between the sea and the sky. It looks so light and airy you’d think
the angels themselves had come down from heaven and painted it.”
   ‘“There’s no such thing as heaven,” said Tolstoy and laughed, in a mean
sort of way.
   ‘“Yes, of course, even I know that. I just said it because it sounds nice.
And where might you be going, if it’s not a secret?”
   ‘“And suppose it is?” Tolstoy asked.
   ‘“If it’s a secret, then I beg your pardon. I’m always putting my foot in
my mouth.”
   ‘The old man embraced him, gave him a warm pat on the back and said:
“Now, now, that’s obvious. Think nothing of it. You’re a true artist, an artist
of life, and deep down you know this yourself. Keep on as you’ve been
doing, keep making other people happy. That’s the way to live. As for me,
I’m searching all over Russia for the quietest possible monastery, a refuge,
where I might live in peace and finish my final book without care or
bother.”
   ‘Koler asked: “And what might this book of yours be about, if you’ll
excuse my ignorance once more?”
   ‘“About everything that is good in this world, everything I’ve lived long
enough to see,” the old man replied.
   ‘“That’s a tall order,” Koler said. “Too much to pick from. Take colours –
there’s so many good ones, dozens of them. How can you possibly write
about all the good things in this world?”
   ‘“I’ll write as much as I can. I’ll start with an old man who lived in a hut
by a river. Every morning he went and stood on his doorstep to watch the
yellow buntings bathing in the wet grass. And he thought: ‘Perhaps I should
go and pick cowberries in the forest. I’ll pick an entire basketful, or perhaps
I shan’t pick any, but shall lie down under a pine tree and take my eternal
rest,’ for he was quite old, you see. ‘But none of it matters, it’s all the same
either way, whether I live a bit longer here on earth or make way for the
young. I’ve lived a long time and have had much joy in my life, so why not
let someone take my place and live and love life as I have?’”
   ‘“No, no!” said Koler. “I don’t understand that kind of talk. Happiness is
when chips fly from a man’s chisel, or paint spreads as smooth as a lake
from his brush. As for me, the greatest joy comes from work. Your words,
Leo Nikolaevich, I find useless.”’
   ‘That’s right!’ the man with the bandaged face exclaimed. ‘It’s work that
makes the world go round. The working man, now he’s the basis of
everything. Get your work done, I say, then you can go and stare at the
buntings or the dewy grass or whatever you like.’
   ‘No one ever worked harder than Tolstoy,’ came the sleepy voice from
back in the car. ‘I know, I’ve read him.’
   ‘True!’ shouted the puffy-faced man unexpectedly. ‘Take me, I pick up a
clump of earth before planting, I rub it in my hands, I smell it, and then I
can tell how the seed will take to the soil – how much moisture it has in it,
and whether it’s enough to see this seed through until harvest time.’
   ‘There’s no need to shout,’ said the same sleepy voice. ‘Maybe that Koler
made the whole thing up. House painters are well known to be liars. It’s just
too bad that Leo Tolstoy never did finish that book about all the good things
in this earth. We’d have read it.’
   ‘Orderly!’ came the same demanding tone from the puffy face. ‘Open the
curtain! The sun’s up. Let me look out of the window and see where we are.
I expect we’ll soon be in Kostroma, that’s my home.’
   The men stopped talking. I drew back the stiff linen curtain and looked
out on the autumn landscape of northern Russia. The misty gold of its birch
groves, fields of stubble and nameless meandering rivers stretched all the
way to the horizon. The train raced over the tracks, covering the sentry
boxes in steam as we hurtled along. Never before had I seen an autumn like
this: such bright skies, brittle air, glittering silver cobwebs, ravines
overgrown with crimson sorrel, ponds so clear their sandy bottoms caught
the sun. Never before had I looked out into the distance and seen such a
shimmering haze or such gentle clouds floating motionless in the moist blue
sky of morning. I was so absorbed I didn’t immediately notice the weight
on my back. The puffy man had put his cast-iron arm on my shoulder and
pushed himself up to look out of the window.
   ‘Oh, let me tell you, brother,’ he said almost as if in song, ‘how I’d love
to walk all over this land barefoot and be served tea in every single hut.
Except for now there’s one little problem. I’ve got nothing to walk on.’
   I turned round and saw through his gown the outline of the tightly
bandaged stump of his amputated leg.
   As the train sailed over the dewy hills, the engine gave a shout, as if it
were the bearer of some long-awaited joyful news.
   ‘Ah,’ said the puffy man, ‘the faster we go the sooner our wives and
mothers will weep. It’d almost be better if we didn’t go home. But that’s no
good. Nope, that’s no good either.’


1An organisation created in 1914 by private citizens and groups to aid the
government in the war effort.

                             OceanofPDF.com
47
Russia in Snow



We made a few trips on the train from Moscow to various cities in central
Russia – Yaroslavl, Ivanovo-Voznesensk, Samara, Arzamas, Kazan,
Simbirsk, Saratov, Tambov, and several others. For some reason I have
largely forgotten these cities. I recall much better the little towns we visited,
such as Bazarny Syzgan, the isolated villages and one lone peasant hut
buried in snow on the edge of a remote settlement. I can’t even remember
which province that was – maybe Kazan or Tambov or possibly Penza.
   I can still see that hut. And a tall old man with a sheepskin coat thrown
over his bony shoulders. He had just come out of his low door and stood
there holding it open with one hand as he watched our long train with the
red crosses painted on its sides go past. The wind was blowing snow down
from the roof onto his shaggy head. It was winter. Russia lay buried in
snow.
   When the train was full of wounded, I was too busy to notice a thing. But
on our return trips, with each of us orderlies alone in his scrubbed, empty
carriage, we had all the time in the world to look out of the window, read or
catch up on our sleep. What I remember of those trips was the impression of
never-ending snow, its whiteness flooding the carriage with light, and of a
low-hanging pewter sky. A few lines of verse I had once read kept running
through my head: ‘The silent country, bedecked in white, like the bride in
her veil.’1 I was aware of a strange connection between the snow and the
verse and the snow-white caps and gowns of the nurses making their
morning rounds up and down the train when it was full.
   Bazarny Syzgan. I remember this station because of one minor incident.
We stood there all night in the sidings. There was a blizzard. By morning
the entire train was covered in snow. I went with an orderly from the next
carriage, Nikolasha Rudnev, a good-natured country bumpkin who was a
student at the Petrovskaya Agricultural Academy, to buy some rolls in the
station buffet. As always after a blizzard the air was sharp and clear. The
buffet was empty. Hydrangeas, shrivelled from the cold, stood on a long
table covered with an oilcloth. A poster of a mountain goat on a snowy peak
in the Caucasus hung by the door. The caption read: ‘Drink Saradzhev
Cognac’. The buffet smelled of coffee and burnt onions.
   A snub-nosed girl wearing an apron over a short, fur-trimmed jacket sat
at a small table with a sad expression on her face. She was watching a boy
with a sallow face and a long, translucent neck which had been rubbed raw
by the collar of his peasant coat. Thin flaxen hair fell over his forehead. The
boy sat drinking tea from an earthenware mug, snow melting onto the floor
from his worn-out boots beneath the table. He broke off big chunks of rye
bread. When he had finished, he gathered up the crumbs from the table and
poured them into his mouth.
   We bought some rolls, sat down at the table and ordered tea. A samovar
gurgled behind the wooden partition. The girl brought us our tea with two
withered lemon slices. She nodded at the boy and said: ‘I always feed him.
Out of my own pocket. He lives off charity. He goes from carriage to
carriage every time a train comes in.’
   The boy finished his tea, turned over his mug, stood up, turned to the
poster advertising Saradzhev cognac and crossed himself. He then lifted his
chest, gazed out of the wide station window and began to sing. Apparently,
he sang as a way to thank the compassionate girl. He sang in a high,
mournful voice, and at the time it seemed to me that his song was the finest
expression of the sadness of Russian village life. I remember only a few
words:

       . . . and he buried her
       In the damp pine woods,
       Beneath the log of oak,
       Beneath the log of oak . . .

  I automatically looked where the boy was staring. A road buried deep in
snow ran down into a gully between rows of trees covered with hoar-frost.
Beyond the gully and the thatched barn roofs, chimney smoke rose from the
huts towards an unassuming grey sky. The boy’s eyes were filled with
longing, for the things he didn’t have, like a simple hut with wide benches
around its walls, a broken window covered over with paper, and the smell
of warm rye bread with cinders baked into the crust. I thought of how little
it takes to make someone happy when they have nothing, and how much,
once we have a little.
   Over the years I have often spent time in peasant huts and have come to
love them for the dull sheen of their timber walls, the smell of ashes in the
stove and their simple austerity, similar to that of fresh water from a spring,
a bast basket or the unprepossessing flowers of a potato patch. No one can
be fully human without a feeling for their homeland, with all its simple and
endearing little details. This feeling is selfless and fills us with a profound
interest for everything around us. Alexander Blok wrote during those
distant, troubled years:

       Russia, poor Russia,
       Your grey huts,
       Your wind-snatched songs
       Move me like the first tears of love.

   Blok was right, of course. Especially with that comparison, for just as
there is nothing more human, more emotionally devastating, than tears of
love, so is there nothing more loathsome than indifference to one’s country,
to its past, present and future, to its language, its customs, its fields and
forests, to its villages and people, be they geniuses or village cobblers.
   It was during my years of service on the hospital train that I first became
aware of myself as Russian to my very core. I dissolved, as it were, in that
human flood, among soldiers, workers, peasants and craftsmen. This gave
me an inner confidence. Not even the war could shake it. ‘Great is the God
of the Russian land,’ Nikolasha Rudnev liked to say. ‘Great is the genius of
the Russian people! We’ll never be anyone’s slaves. The future belongs to
us!’
   I agreed with Rudnev. For me, Russia in those years was embodied by all
those soldiers, peasants and villages, so poor in their material possessions,
so rich in their grief. I saw so many Russian cities and industrial towns for
the first time. They melted into one in my mind and left behind a love for
the common, everyday things they all shared. I remember Arzamas with its
wicker baskets overflowing with crisp red apples, and its equally red
cupolas, so many of them that the town seemed to have been sewn together
in red and gold thread by the hands of master artists. Nizhny Novgorod
welcomed me with a gust of wind from the Volga which brought with it the
smell of sacking. This was the city of Russian enterprise, of warehouses,
barrels and crates – Russia’s bustling wharf from which goods were shipped
far and wide. Then there was Kazan with its snow-dusted statue of
Derzhavin.2 Here, in the opera house, I found myself too tired to stay awake
and dozed off in the gallery during a performance of Rimsky-Korsakov’s
The Snow Maiden. All I can remember were a few words that penetrated
my sleep: ‘Are all the doors really locked to the girls, all the entrances
forbidden?’
   I woke up in the middle of the night. The night watchman grabbed me
and took me to the police station. It smelled of sealing wax. An obese
sergeant wrote up a report about my ‘sleeping without authorisation in a
theatre hall’. I walked back to the train. The wind from the Volga plastered
my face with snow, and I felt sorry for Derzhavin, frozen through and
staring out into the darkness with his hard bronze eyes.
   I was in Simbirsk on another winter night. The deserted town was
covered in frost. The trees in the neglected gardens seemed to be made of
tinfoil. I looked out towards the Volga from Stary Venets Square, but all I
could see was a misty frozen darkness. I didn’t know then that Lenin was
from Simbirsk. Now, of course, I seem to think that I saw his wooden
house. This must be because there are many warm timber houses like this,
their windows casting shafts of light on the narrow streets at night. All I
knew at the time was that Goncharov had lived in Simbirsk, that plodding
man who possessed an almost magical gift for the Russian language. His
light, true and vigorous prose lives on in his books.
   Saratov struck me as proper and a bit boring. The town exuded an aura of
self-important prosperity and strict order. That was the impression I
gathered from the main streets in the centre. Then I found the alleys and
back streets and Babushka Hill, where little boys were sledging through
mounds of puffy dry snow. The boys let me join in. I loved rushing, face
down on the toboggan, past the small houses with geraniums glowing in
their windows. I actually envied the people who lived in them.
   One of the boys took me to have some warm milk in the home of a
certain Sofia Tikhonovna, who lived in one of these houses. We were
shown into a glassed-in front porch. Pale sunlight, cut into four squares by
the windowpanes, lay on the clean floor. In the corner of the warm
anteroom stood a bucket of cold water; a wooden jug floated on top. The
door opened to a parlour with dark red velvet curtains over the windows. A
wall clock with enormous hands ticked so loudly that we had to raise our
voices to talk to Sofia Tikhonovna, a quiet old woman. On a little table
covered with a lace cloth by the window lay a thick stack of copies of The
Planted Field in blue paper covers and a vase of long-dead flowers. Along
with some photographs and watercolours there hung on the wall a large,
yellowing poster for Maxim Gorky’s Children of the Sun.
   ‘My son’s an actor,’ said Sofia Tikhonovna. ‘In St Petersburg. He visits
me every summer, either on his way to or from Mineralnye Vody.’
   I tried to imagine such a life spent in waiting for her son. It must have
been hard, but the old woman bore it lightly and without complaint. Every
object in the house had been washed, polished and cherished for the sole
purpose of possibly being of use to her son for those fleeting seven days out
of the long year he came to visit. What if he suddenly looked over at her
and asked: ‘Mama, where’s that brass night lamp?’ Or, ‘What’s happened to
the Crimean stone I brought you from Simeiz five years ago?’
   And so the brass night lamp had been polished with tooth powder and
stood shining in its regular place. And lying on top of the stack of copies of
The Planted Field was the flat Crimean stone – the very same stone known
to half of Russia, with its ‘Greetings from Crimea’ painted on it in crude
colours, along with a cypress tree and an azure sea, a white dot for a sailing
boat.
   There were a great many towns. Spring came at last with its fragrant,
slightly sticky young leaves to gladden the empty provincial wastelands and
the dirty streams. That spring we visited Kursk, which seemed to be filled
with enormous flowering bushes that reached as high as the eaves. The
famous Kursk nightingales sang and then paused, as if to listen to
themselves, in the damp woods. The cold and lazy river Tuskar flowed
between its low banks overgrown with yellow marsh marigolds. Kursk is a
strange town. Many people love it even though they’ve never been there,
mostly because it’s the gateway to the south. Looking out of the dusty
windows of the Moscow–Sevastopol Express and seeing the houses and
churches on the town’s hills, the passengers knew that within twenty-four
hours they would wake up to the haze of a seaside dawn pink with almond
blossoms and would recognise by the brilliance of the horizon that they had
arrived.
   Spring had come to Russia. We found it in Vladimir, in Klyazma, in
Tambov, in Tver – wherever we took the wounded. With every run we
noticed that the wounded were more silent. They had become harder and
more withdrawn. The entire country itself had fallen silent, as if it were
thinking about how to parry the blow that had been struck against it.
   Soon our entire unit was transferred to the front. We left on our first trip
to the west, to Brest-Litovsk and the battle lines.


1Opening lines of an untitled poem by Balmont from his cycle Southern
Cross (1914).
2   Gavrila Derzhavin (1743–1816), poet and statesman, born in Kazan.

                              OceanofPDF.com
48
Paper Scraps and the Bugler



The   front-line hospital train consisted mostly of heated goods wagons.
There were only four passenger carriages, and in one of these an operating
theatre had been set up. I was assigned to this carriage. From that moment
on I was all alone. Only doctors and nurses were allowed into the operating
theatre. For days on end I did nothing but rub the white walls with
turpentine, scrub the floors, sterilise bandages and gauze in the autoclave
and listen to the singing of our ‘chemist’, who spent his days in his little
cubbyhole of a dispensary behind a partition. Romanin was in fact just a
student from the Moscow Institute of Trade. He loved to sing all sorts of
songs to combat his loneliness in the train dispensary.
   His repertoire was extensive. When he was feeling playful, he’d sing:

       How I’d love a young man,
       Parading in a fine white shirt,
       Such a fine white shirt,
       A fancy cane in his hand.

In a melancholy mood, Romanin would sob:

       Oh, my beloved, why did you kiss me so,
       And set my heart ablaze with this terrible glow . . .

  Sometimes Dr Pokrovsky would upbraid him for mixing up the
medicines and then Romanin would become morose and sing an ominous
anarchist anthem:

       Hark to the sound of the signal,
       And the mighty cannons’ roll,
       Arise, O brothers, heed the call of Ravachol!
   Romanin had a nasty habit of sitting in his dispensary for hour upon hour,
hiding from me and refusing to acknowledge my calls from the other side of
the partition. It was not surprising then, how I’d jump, startled and
swearing, when the silence was suddenly broken by some ridiculous tune
sung in his desperate howl:

       He was a bit paunchy,
       Ah, yes, paunchy, paunchy,
       And something of a baldy,
       But did I care?!

   To the accompaniment of these songs our empty train crawled over the
sodden plains from Moscow to Brest-Litovsk. At night I’d take myself off
to bed in a carriage set aside for the orderlies known as the ‘staff room’. My
bunkmates were Romanin, Nikolasha Rudnev, a decent oaf from the
agricultural college in Petrovsk, and a quiet Pole by the name of Hugo
Lyakhman. In his little free time, Lyakhman did nothing but polish his
boots. The shine was unbearable.
   It was quiet at the front, and so we sat for a long time in Brest, a dull
town set in the middle of a sorrowful plain. That spring of 1915 was equally
sorrowful. Nothing grew here but some dandelions along the paths. The
sunlight barely shone through the permanently hazy sky. The war was right
next door, but all we could see of it were the throngs of soldiers and low-
ranking officers milling about Brest station and the long troop trains
crowding the dirty sidings. The air war had as yet not begun. The Germans’
big guns could not reach Brest. The fighting was far off, near Keltse.
   We were impatient to be sent to the front. We were tired of waiting. It
seemed to us as if the wheels of the train had rusted to the rails and the train
would never move. Young and excited, we had forgotten that staying in
Brest meant that soldiers weren’t being wounded in battle, that there was a
lack of injured and maimed men. Only Romanin thought of this, and he
would say to us: ‘You’ve come to the front acting as if it’s a night out at the
theatre. Stamping your feet in a hurry for the curtain to go up. You fools!’
   It was always quiet for a few minutes in the staff room after Romanin’s
outbursts, but then the arguments broke out again – typical Russian student
arguments. They were loud, endless and always well meant, even if we held
wildly divergent views. Mostly we argued about Germany and the
monstrous stupidity and impudence of the Prussian militarists. Kaiser
Wilhelm II’s spiky waxed moustache, the fantasy of all martinets and
pimps, served as the symbol of Germany in those days. It seemed
impossible to believe that this was the Germany of Schiller and Goethe,
Richard Wagner and the young and, at the time, beautiful writer Heinrich
Mann.
   Finally, the day came. Our train slowly began to move. I leapt from the
train and raced down the platform to the operating carriage; once we were
in motion, it wasn’t possible to go from one to the other. I hopped up,
opened the door and sat down on the rear platform, my legs dangling over
the side. I sat like that for several hours, my eyes searching the fields and
villages of Poland for traces of war as we rolled along. But there weren’t
any. We rode past villages where the bindweed clung to the fences upon
which the locals had placed their clay pitchers, upside down, to dry, just as
it was done back home in Ukraine. Arrogant storks looked out from their
enormous nests on top of the peasant huts. The air was soft and the colour
of pale gold, like the hair of the young children who waved excitedly at the
passing train.
   Just as soft and golden was the face of a Polish girl carrying two buckets
of water on her yoke. She stopped to set the buckets on the ground, shielded
her eyes with her hand and watched for a long time as the carriages slowly
rumbled by. Then, she brushed a strand of hair from her face and picked up
her buckets. Tall black crucifixes stood at the crossroads. Old women with
their knitting sat beside them, and tethered goats grazed on the grass.
Candles burned in a small chapel, but I could not make out anyone inside.
And still the same soft golden colour of the fields and the same streams,
sluggishly flowing over pale, golden sandy bottoms.
   ‘Where’s the war?’ I asked myself. Our train passed by the fortress at
Ivangorod. Far beyond the Vistula we could see its green earthworks and
the tall stumps of ancient black poplars felled during the siege.
   And then suddenly I saw it: hurriedly dug trenches filled with water
stretched in rows across the swampy lowlands from the railway tracks all
the way to the horizon. Our train was moving along a high dike. The engine
let out a whistle, the brakes screeched and we stopped: for some reason the
bridge across the Vistula was closed. In the silence which followed we
could hear a bugler blowing some kind of signal from inside the fortress.
Orderlies began jumping out of the train.
   ‘We’re gonna be here for a good hour,’ Romanin yelled to me. ‘Come
on!’
   We ran down the steep bank and then walked along the trenches. I began
to catch sight of paper scraps and crumpled tin cans lying everywhere in the
grass, which had apparently sprouted after the battle. The tins had been
opened in a hurry, perhaps with a bayonet. Their jagged edges had rust on
them; it looked like blood.
   I didn’t understand how so much paper could end up on a battlefield.
There were scraps of letters, newspapers, postcards, books, documents and
faded, sweat-stained photographs. Soldiers’ caps had been trampled into the
mud. An Austrian cap, its peak torn off, dangled from a burnt bush. Rags of
coarse cotton soldiers’ underwear fluttered in the wind on a twisted barbed-
wire entanglement, as if they had purposely been hung up there to dry.
Barbed wire lay about in piles of rust.
   ‘It looks as if water isn’t the only thing that can rust iron,’ mumbled
Romanin.
   ‘What else?’
   ‘Blood,’ he replied, reluctantly.
   All around lay soldiers’ boots, buttons, cartridges, steel clips, torn
packets of Ira cigarettes, grey machine-gun straps, red silk ribbons, nails,
soaked tobacco pouches embossed with crosses, little icons, belts, the soles
of boots, wrapping paper, dirty bandages tied up with string, Austrian
dagger-bayonets, smashed wooden spoons, steel shell casings, bullet-
riddled canteens, broken glass. This was the rubbish of war – everything a
man leaves behind on the field of death, everything that he had cherished
while alive and then tossed away, abandoned to the sun, wind and rain. I
thought to myself that grown men had fought and died here, but each one of
them had treated his soldier’s property, which he had carried and feared to
part with, like a child. Near a shell hole lay a dead horse, its bones picked
clean by carrion crows, its long yellow teeth exposed as if in a laugh. The
water at the bottom of the hole was black with fat tadpoles as round as
rubber balls.
   It was very quiet. Nothing but the sound of field mice rustling in the
rubbish. And then, from behind the fortress walls, the bugler sounded his
mournful notes once again. That sound brought to mind my childhood
notion of war as something magnificent. The sound of the bugle held all the
glorious lies about war that I, and many others, had been brought up on
since my earliest years: the flutter of the banners, the singing of trumpets,
charging hoof beats, bullets whistling through the air, the glitter of swords,
the steely bristling of bayonets, the exhilarating sense of danger. I still knew
by heart the splendid verses first learned as a little boy of Le chevalier sans
peur et sans reproche.
    Father had three thick volumes of Gnedich’s History of Art.1 I loved to
look at the pictures by Matejko, Willewalde, Meissonier, Gros – all those
paintings of the battles of Eylau and Fère-Champenoise, of hussars’ attacks,
the uhlans’ lances, neat round puffs of cannon smoke, and of generals with
brass field glasses in their hands, their maps spread out before them on a
drum.2 Of course, I knew war was nothing like these paintings. But these
images of the splendour of war nevertheless stuck in my mind and refused
to let go. What I saw now was not war itself, only its aftermath, its dirt, its
stench, its refuse. It was not what I had expected. But I kept quiet and said
nothing to Romanin.
    The engine whistled and let out two puffs of steam along the tracks. It
was time to go back. We walked in silence to the train. On the platform
Romanin gave me a sideways glance and said: ‘You’ve got to get used to it,
little fellow. This is nothing.’
    I lost my temper and swore at Romanin. It was the one and only time
during our wartime friendship that I ever did.


1   Pëtr Gnedich, author of The History of Art from Ancient Times (1885).
2Painters known for their works on military themes: Jan Matejko (1838–
93), Bogdan Willewalde (1819–1903), Ernst Meissonier (1815–91) and
Antoine-Jean Gros (1771–1835).

                               OceanofPDF.com
49
Rain in the Carpathian Foothills



We were on our way from Brest to Keltse, but it looked as if we’d never
make it to this distant Polish town. We were forever being held up. For
more than a week we remained stuck at the junction near Skarzhisko. In
those days many of these junctions, built at the intersection of several rail
lines far from any human settlement, were quite astonishing places. A large
station with a restaurant, bright incandescent lights, dozens of lines, a
smoky depot, small wooden shacks for the railway workers set amid a stand
of acacias and beyond these – nothing but empty fields. Crows spun in the
windy air, and no matter what direction you looked, there was nothing – no
hut, no chimney smoke, only the straight, dusty track of the high road
stretching to the edge of the earth.
   This is how it was at Skarzhisko. A hundred paces from the main station,
the larks trilled in the sky and a narrow road vanished into the swaying
fields of grain. An enormous unfinished stone church stood in a field not far
from the station. Whoever would have thought to build such a thing in this
deserted spot? Who needed a church out here? No one could say. Swifts
darted between the roofless walls. A flight of stone steps, its railing gone
and now covered in grass which swayed softly in the wind, led up to a
gallery. After tidying up the operating carriage, I would take a book by
Tagore and walk over to the church. I liked to read sitting on an unfinished
wall that faced the fields. Sometimes my mind would wander and I would
forget what I was reading, but this was no less enjoyable.
   The children of the Polish railway workers liked to follow me in single
file into the church. The dogs followed them, and soon the church became a
playground. The children were quiet, almost timid, with very attentive eyes,
in whose depths a trusting smile always seemed to be on the verge of
breaking out. I tried to speak to them in Polish, but they just looked at each
other with an awkward expression: none of them could understand me. I
was speaking a horrible mix of Polish-Russian-Ukrainian that passed for
Polish back in Kiev.
   After a while Romanin, Nikolasha Rudnev and Yelena Petrovna
Sveshnikova, one of the nurses, came with me to the church. Everyone
called her simply Lëlya. She was a headstrong girl with something of a
husky voice and a pale face. She looked as though she was trying to hide
some inner turmoil. We had become friends while still working on a train in
the rear. One night during her rounds she found me asleep on duty, and
while trying to wake me up accidentally dripped hot candle wax on my
face.
   I jumped to my feet, blinded by pain. Lëlya bandaged me up, one
moment crying from shame and fear and the next laughing at her own
stupidity and my pathetic appearance. Once Lëlya sneaked up behind me in
the church, ripped Tagore from my hands, and flung the book as far as she
could. It flew through the air, its pages flap-ping, and landed in the grass. I
turned and was met by Lëlya’s eyes, black with anger.
   ‘You’ve had plenty enough of your dusty old philosophy!’ she said.
   I sat there not saying a word. Neither did Lëlya. Then she asked: ‘What’s
that off in the distance?’
   ‘The peaks of the Carpathians.’
   ‘Are you angry with me?’ she asked. ‘If so, I’ll go and find your book.’
   ‘No, don’t bother.’
   ‘Fine then! Let’s go and have a look at the bridge.’
   We set off for the railway bridge, which crossed a small stream whose
banks were overgrown with brambles. We stood by the bridge for a long
time, looking at the Carpathians, which were piled up along the horizon like
storm clouds. A sentry came by, stopped and also looked off into the
distance.
   ‘However much we try,’ he eventually said, ‘it’s hard for fellows like us
to get used to foreign lands. Even the rain here is different. The grass looks
like grass, but it’s not like ours.’
   ‘Is that bad?’ asked Lëlya.
   ‘No, it’s not bad, miss,’ the soldier said, mildly annoyed. ‘Sure the great
expanse is nice, but there’s something cold about it too. Like the strange
feeling you get waking up from a nap.’
   Lëlya laughed. The soldier sighed and walked off. ‘You can’t stand here,’
he said in an uncertain voice as he went. ‘Even if you are one of us, no one
is allowed to be here.’
   Lëlya was to be the cause of one of the greatest humiliations in my life.
   I was sent once from Brest to Moscow to pick up some medical supplies.
All the doctors, nurses and orderlies asked me to run errands for them and
gave me letters and notes to deliver; at the time everyone tried not to use the
postal system in order to avoid the military censorship. Lëlya entrusted me
with her gold wristwatch and asked me to give it to her uncle, a professor in
Moscow. The fancy gold watch embarrassed her; it was, of course, utterly
out of place in a hospital train. She also gave me a letter for him, filled with
compliments about me and asking her uncle to take me in if I needed a
place to stay.
   I made my way to the professor’s door in Moscow and rang the bell. No
one opened for a long time. Finally, a peevish female voice from inside
asked who it was and what I wanted. A cross-eyed old maid opened the
door. Towering behind her stood a tall old lady, as imposing and majestic as
a monument, in a white starched blouse and black bow-tie. Her silver hair
had been piled up in a haughty swirl and it glistened like the glass in her
pince-nez. This was the professor’s wife. She stood guarding the door to the
dining room, where the family were drinking their morning coffee. I could
hear the sound of clinking spoons. I gave her the box with the watch and the
letter.
   ‘Wait here,’ she said and went into the dining room, but not before giving
the maid a knowing glance. She immediately began pretending to dust the
front-hall table, which, by the looks of it, had already been polished to a
glossy sheen earlier that morning.
   ‘Who rang?’ came a raspy old voice from the dining room. ‘What do
they want?’
   ‘Imagine,’ she said, rustling a piece of paper (she had apparently opened
Lëlya’s letter), ‘off at the front in the middle of a war but Lëlya’s still as
featherbrained as always. She sent her gold watch. With some soldier, no
less. How could she be so careless? Just like her mother!’
   ‘Mmmmm,’ mumbled the professor, his mouth full of food. ‘She’s lucky
he didn’t keep it.’
   ‘Really, I don’t understand her at all,’ she went on. ‘She writes here that
she’d like us to take him in. Where are we supposed to put him? We don’t
have any room. As it is Pasha has to sleep in the kitchen.’
   ‘That’s all we need,’ groaned the professor. ‘Give him a rouble and see
him out. Lëlya ought to know by know how I hate strangers in the house.’
   ‘Seems too little, one rouble,’ she said doubtfully. ‘What do you think,
Pëtr Petrovich?’
   ‘All right, then two roubles.’
   I opened the front door, exited onto the landing and then slammed the
door behind me so hard that something inside the professor’s flat fell and
crashed to the floor with a loud bang. I froze. Immediately, the door flew
open. Behind the maid, who had made certain to keep the chain on the door,
stood the entire family: the professor’s haughty wife, her horse-faced
student son and the old professor. A napkin covered with yellow egg stains
hung from the collar of his shirt.
   ‘What is the meaning of this outrage?’ screamed the maid. ‘It’s
disgraceful! And from a soldier sent to the front to defend the Fatherland,
no less!’
   ‘Tell your masters’, I said, ‘that they are swine.’
   With that there was a scuffle in the vestibule. The student lunged at the
door and tried to undo the chain, but his mother pulled him back.
   ‘Leave him be, Genya!’ she shouted. ‘He’ll kill you. These soldiers from
the front are used to killing.’
   The old professor pushed himself forward. His clean little beard quivered
with indignation. He cupped his hands around his mouth and shouted
through the chink in the door: ‘Hooligan! I’ll turn you over to the police!’
   ‘Oh, you,’ I said. ‘The shining light of science.’
   His wife yanked the old man back and then slammed the door.
   Ever since I’ve had a life-long distrust of those so-called ‘high-priests of
learning’, that tribe of pseudo-scholars who are so proud of their erudition
yet remain forever nothing but vulgar philistines. There are more forms of
vulgarity than we can register. Even such an unerring expert on vulgarity as
Chekhov never could have described all its manifestations. How I loathe
those academic families with their ridiculous, sanctified family ways, with
their inflated sense of decorum, their arrogant politeness, their venerable
pedant- fathers, pompously opining on the number of hairs on a worm, their
smooth grammatical speech, their prim, prudish wives and their secret
balance sheets recording the successes and failures of their rivals! And
those professors’ flats with their disciplined servants and their unbearable
tedium – tried and tested and never to be changed until death itself.
    I didn’t tell Lëlya about this incident. We loved to talk, argue and spend
our evenings in a little café, where we drank coffee, ate homemade pastries
and watched the old proprietress embroider red flowers on a linen
tablecloth. Once more, there was nothing to remind us of the war. If it
weren’t for the sentry by the bridge, we might have thought we were on
holiday deep in the Polish countryside. And any thoughts of war seemed
utterly incongruous with Lëlya’s virginal pallor and Tagore’s teachings on
cleansing the human soul of evil. Quiet sunsets faded over the fields and the
far-off peaks of the Carpathians. Our days, filled with meditation and
happiness, ended in their smouldering depths. Boys and girls like us were
more prone to introspection than adults back then, and were, of course,
much happier, even in wartime.
    One evening the sun set in a leaden mist. That night rain drummed on the
carriage roofs, and in the morning we left Skarzhisko for Keltse. The
foothills of the Carpathians suddenly drew close. A damp air from the
beech forests blew in through the train’s windows. Clouds drifted over the
hilltops, now hiding, now revealing the roadside crucifixes. Suddenly, a
heavy cannon shot rumbled lazily through the mist. The train seemed to
slow down. There was a second shot, then a third, and then nothing but
silence.
    ‘Romanin!’ I called through the partition. ‘Did you hear that?’
    ‘Yes,’ he answered. ‘And I’m surprised.’
    ‘Why?’
    ‘Come here and I’ll tell you.’
    I went into the dispensary. I loved its cramped and cosy tidiness. It
smelled of dried raspberries. Romanin was weighing out powders on his
little scales with their mother-of-pearl pans.
    ‘Have a seat,’ he said. ‘Go ahead and smoke if you want. I’m going to. I
have to admit I don’t even know why I’m surprised.’
    ‘Really? Don’t you?’
    ‘Let’s leave it. Probably not even worth trying to make sense of. Here,
have a look around. Everything sparkles, everything is in its place. Every
phial is in its little wooden holder. Cosy, right? I sit here all day, even when
there’s nothing to do. I read, look out of the window. Sometimes I sleep
here in my chair.’
    He ran his eyes over the rows of porcelain phials and sighed. ‘One stray
shell and all of this would be blown straight to hell. This is what surprises
me. The closer we come to danger, the more we love these things – fragile
phials, practically made out of air, books, cleanliness, peace and quiet,
cigarettes.’
   ‘We’re not going to be hit by a shell! It’s not going to happen,’ I said.
   Black sidings running this way and that sped past us outside the window.
We were approaching Keltse. A soft rain drizzled through the shell holes in
the station warehouses. We waited three days in Keltse for the wounded to
arrive. The head doctor allowed Lëlya, Romanin and me to visit the village
of Khentsiny near the front. An artillery unit was stationed at Khentsiny.
Lëlya’s cousin served in it. We started late in the morning in a two-wheeled
ambulance cart. It was still raining. Acrid smoke from the locomotives
clung to the city. On the outskirts, red water pooled in the bottom of deep
pits where they dug for clay; rust-coloured bubbles rose and then popped
upon the surface. We passed a bombed-out brick factory. Women and
children with empty sacks were rummaging about and looking for
something amid the piles of broken bricks. We came out onto the main road
leading to the front. It looked like a shallow river of mud.
   Soldiers were trudging through the fields on either side of the road.
Pulling up the wet skirts of their greatcoats with one hand, with the other
they dragged spools of barbed wire affixed to wooden poles. A primitive
ambulance had lost a wheel and been abandoned in a ditch by the roadside.
Soldiers crowded around it and took turns crawling inside to smoke,
sheltered from the rain. Each patiently waited his turn, his wet fingers
rolling a cigarette made from cheap tobacco and damp newsprint. Then he
climbed into the ambulance, lit up and, with a look of pleasure spreading
across his face, took a deep draw of the harsh smoke. They stood hunched
over, their hands pulled up inside the sleeves of their coats; every so often
one of them would spit as he looked to the west. A raw, gusty wind blew
from that direction, lashing the branches of the bushes and driving the
clouds.
   ‘Nice spot for a smoke,’ our dark little driver said scornfully, his face
hidden by the upturned collar of his greatcoat. ‘Amazing what a man will
do for tobacco.’
   ‘What’s wrong with it?’ asked Romanin. ‘It’s out of the rain.’
   ‘The Germans are always shelling this bit of road,’ the soldier answered.
‘Every hour they send over two or three shells. As a warning. It’s like
clockwork for them. The Germans fight according to their watches, don’t
you know. So I keep an eye out and make sure to slip past right after one of
their shells hits.’
   ‘Does that work?’
   ‘Depends,’ he replied, calmly. ‘Most of the time. But it doesn’t pay to try
it every day. You’ve got to have some luck.’
   Suddenly, the soldiers by the ambulance began to move. Some quickly
squatted on their heels, others dashed towards a small depression by the
side of the road. The smokers didn’t bother to climb out of the ambulance
and went on puffing away, burning their fingers, and spitting.
   ‘Those German gunners have finished their cigarettes!’ the driver yelled
in a mocking tone to the soldiers. ‘Just maybe they’ll let you finish yours!
Good luck to you!’
   Just then something flashed and screeched overhead, followed by a loud
explosion. Not far from the ambulance a fountain of yellow mud erupted
from the ground.
   ‘Get on with you!’ the driver yelled at the horses. ‘Damn! Good for
nothing but sausage, you are!’
   But the horses kept on at their slow pace. A second shell exploded behind
us by the roadside. For the first time in my life I heard the whizz of flying
shrapnel. A young volunteer, practically a boy, ran up to our cart. His face
was smooth and pale, as if he had just arrived at the front. By the look of
him, it was obvious he was the sheltered city child of some educated family.
He grabbed the back of the wagon and asked in a hesitant but very polite
voice: ‘Could you tell me, please, whether they will stop firing any time
soon?’
   Taken aback by this surprising question, the driver groaned and stopped
the horses. ‘Why don’t you ask ’em, ask those Germans, really nicely,’ he
said, an icy sneer on his lips. ‘Get down on your knees. You’re an educated
fellow. Maybe for you they’ll do this favour. Oh, all right! I can see it’s
your first time. Climb in. But just don’t get your muddy boots on the hay.
That’s not what it’s there for, got it?’
   The boy hurriedly climbed in and, turning his head stiffly, as if it had
been bolted on, gave us an apologetic look. A third shell landed behind us, a
bit farther away than the previous one.
   ‘Well, that ought to do it!’ said the driver. ‘Now you can have a smoke.
The Germans have finished their work and are now onto their coffee break.’
   The soldiers were milling around the ambulance again. But they weren’t
so calm now. We could hear them arguing. ‘What do you think you’re doing
lighting up another one? Taking advantage of the shelling, are you, mangy
dog? Climb out before we throw you out!’ ‘Don’t touch me, you ape!
We’ve handled bigger than the likes of you!’ ‘Made a real home for
themselves in there, just like a bunch of broody hens. The Germans
certainly lent them a hand.’ ‘All right, all right, we’re coming out. Stop
your barking. Get in.’
   We drove on. Maybe it was because the danger had just passed, but the
rain seemed warmer and the fields smelled of wet grass. A clear bright
patch of sky showed on the horizon. The road ran between tall poplars. We
had entered the foothills of the Carpathians. The rain clung to the hills like
matted strings of oakum. Clear streams of rainwater rushed through the
stone ditches on the roadside. The gravel glistened. Steam rose off the
horses’ backs. Far off through the bluish haze of the clouds and rain we
caught sight of a hillside town as small as a child’s toy. The sound of the
town’s church bells floated on the wind.
   ‘That’s Khentsiny,’ said the driver. ‘Where do you want to go – the
searchlight regiment or the artillery?’
   ‘Artillery.’
   Our cart stopped in front of a two-storey house. There were no windows
on the front, only a narrow door and over it a black crucifix. The crucified
Christ pursued us the entire time we were in Poland. Some of the crucifixes
had been made with such anatomical precision, down to the clots of blood
oozing out of the emaciated Jesus’s pierced side, that they were truly
repugnant. Romanin liked to say that he had had enough of all these corpses
hanging at the crossroads. He wanted to go home, back to the Ural
Mountains, where for hundreds of versts around there was nothing but the
wooded slopes, the river Sakmara, full of pike, and his father’s beehives.
Romanin’s father, a retired village doctor, was living out his days in a small
country place on the Sakmara.
   The artillery officers welcomed us. They gave us tea and let us lie down
on their camp beds. We were soaked through. Soon we were drowsy from
the tea and the warmth of the room. Before I knew it, I was fast asleep.
   The roar of cannon fire woke me in the middle of the night. An artillery
duel was going on around us. In the next room a candle flickered, and the
officers were quarrelling in hushed voices around a table. They had taken
off their tunics and were playing cards in their shirtsleeves. With each
explosion the glass rattled in the windows and the church bell clanged over
our heads. Rain was pouring down. A frighteningly black night loomed
outside the windows. I lit a cigarette. Romanin shuffled in his bed.
   ‘Yes, indeed,’ he said to no one, ‘rivers of blood and all of it the fault of
rogues and idiots.’
   ‘Who?’ I asked.
   ‘Id-i-ots!’ Romanin repeated, emphasising each syllable. ‘All those
pompous Wilhelms and idiotic Nicholases. And those greedy businessmen.
Half of them are cretins, the others reactionary scoundrels. But knowing all
this doesn’t help us in the least.’
   ‘Listen,’ said Lëlya softly. She couldn’t sleep either. ‘Stop it or I’ll just
burst . . .’
   We were silent. The rain kept coming down. I was hungry, but morning
was still a long way off. I began to doze off, and through my half-sleep I
saw Lëlya get up and go over to the window. She stood staring for a long
time at the darkness where from time to time something flashed, and then
she sighed, straightened my greatcoat, which was slipping off of me, and sat
down on a stool next to her bed, where she remained for a long time, as still
as death, her hands clenched between her knees.

                              OceanofPDF.com
50
Beyond the Muddy San



The molten ball of the sun was sinking into a sparse pine forest on the far
side of the river San. Scattered among the stumps and bushes stood single
pine trees – tall and thin, bent under the weight of their crowns. The sun’s
crimson flame caressed the trunks, spread out over the sand around their
roots, and reflected off the fast, rippling waters of the San. Bluish in the
evening fog, a plain stretched out beyond the forest’s edge. The air had the
bitter-almond smell of marsh flowers.
   This was Galicia. Our train had been held up at the frontier post next to a
wooden bridge over the San. Troop trains were coming from the opposite
direction. I was leaving the country for the first time. On the far side of the
San lay Austria. I felt as if everything on the other side of the frontier must
be different from life at home – and not only the people, villages and cities,
but even the sky and the trees. That’s how I had imagined the world outside
Russia as a child, and this stupid notion had somehow remained with me all
these years. But for now everything looked just as it did at home. The same
dry chicory grew along the paths. My feet still sank into the sand just like in
Russia, and even the water in the San was muddy despite my expecting it to
flow in a clear, gurgling torrent.
   We crossed the bridge over the San during the night and arrived in
Galicia. We stopped at the small town of Melets in the morning. I had no
time to explore it. There was fighting up ahead near Dembitsa, and we were
sent on immediately. All I managed to see from my window were pleasant
green hills, tiled roofs, walls covered with hops and roads, white as chalk
and lined with poplars. Soon we heard heavy, continuous artillery fire and
saw dark clouds of dust stretching across the entire southern horizon. It may
not have been dust, but the smoke of burning villages.
   Wagons filled with refugees trotted past our train, heading north to cross
the San. Ragged groups of worn-out infantrymen straggled by. The ground
shook and rolled. The glass in the carriage windows rattled. The train
eventually stopped in a large clearing. Yellowish clouds of shrapnel
exploded here and there on the surrounding leafy slopes. The cavalry
galloped past. A field battery concealed in some nearby undergrowth fired
with deafening intensity. Dr Pokrovsky ordered us to raise two Red Cross
flags on top of the train.
   We were moved forward a little way towards a bombed-out crossing
keeper’s hut. Beside it on the dirty grass lay dozens of injured men in
makeshift bandages. We immediately began loading the wounded onto the
train. Soon the carriages were full, but the wounded kept coming. We laid
them down in the corridors, in the vestibules, in the staff room. Their low,
painful groans echoed throughout the entire train. The fighting was getting
closer, but we couldn’t see it. All I noticed was a shattered window on the
train and the occasional piercing ring of bullets bouncing off the rails. One
of our orderlies was wounded in the shoulder. Romanin was knocked to the
ground by a heavy blast. We barely noticed any of this since we were all
consumed by one thought, namely getting the wounded aboard as fast as
possible.
   A sweaty officer rode up to the train and shouted for Pokrovsky. His
epaulettes were so covered in dust you couldn’t even tell his rank. ‘Hurry
up!’ he yelled, straining to be heard over the noise. ‘Get this bloody train
out of here. In fifteen minutes it’ll be too late. You’ve got a double load.
Get moving!’ Shaking a whip in his hand, the officer pointed to the north,
while his horse spun in circles as if possessed.
   ‘We can take more wounded up on the roof,’ Pokrovsky shouted back.
   ‘Load them on as you’re heading out,’ he yelled, and then jerked his
horse and galloped towards the engine. Just then the train moved. A few
more wounded managed to grab hold of the handrails and the orderlies
pulled them onto the platforms.
   Only now did I notice it was getting dark. The flashing explosions had
become clearer and the dust cloud on the horizon had turned an ominous
crimson colour. For several minutes we could hear the sound of bullets
ricocheting off the train. Soon we were going very fast. Once we finally
slowed down we realised that we had barely escaped from the ‘pocket’.
   The train was carrying several hundred wounded men, their field
dressings soaked with blood and falling off, their faces darkened by thirst.
All the bandages had to be changed. We had to find the most seriously
wounded among them who required immediate surgery. We set to work at
once, and from that moment on, time stood still. We had ceased to notice it.
Every fifteen minutes I swabbed the blood off the linoleum floor of the
operating room, threw away the crusted bandages, and was then called to
the operating table, where, not fully realising what I was doing, I held a
wounded man’s leg, trying not to look, as Pokrovsky cut through the sugar-
white bone with his hard steel saw. In an instant the leg became heavy in
my hand and I became dimly aware through the fog in my head that the
operation was over, and then I carried the severed leg to a zinc chest, to be
buried later at the next stop.
   Everything smelled of blood, essence of valerian and burning alcohol.
The instruments were constantly being boiled on spirit lamps. Ever since,
the bluish flame of a spirit lamp has reminded me of unbearable pain
covering men’s faces with a deathly, grey sweat.
   Some of the wounded screamed, others gritted their teeth and cursed.
And then there was one man whose fortitude amazed even the
imperturbable Pokrovsky. His pelvis had been shattered, and the pain must
have been beyond description, yet somehow he managed to walk to the
operating room by himself, holding onto the walls as he went. All he asked
for while his wound was being dressed was permission to smoke to help
‘take the edge off’. Not once did he let out a moan or a cry; instead he tried
to reassure Pokrovsky and Lëlya, who was helping the doctor pick out the
shrapnel fragments and apply a complicated bandage.
   ‘It’s nothing!’ he was saying. ‘I can handle it. Not bad at all. Don’t you
worry.’
   His eyes alone gave away the pain. They twitched and dimmed with each
passing minute behind a yellowish film.
   ‘We’ve never seen a braver warrior than you. Where’re you from?’
Pokrovsky asked gruffly.
   ‘My people are from Vologda, Your Excellency,’ the man replied. ‘My
mother birthed me in a dark wood. All alone she was. She washed me clean
in a puddle. We’re all like this back there, Your Excellency. ’Course a
wounded animal will scream, but it ain’t right for a human being.’
   I no longer remember how long it took for these endless operations and
dressings. During especially complicated operations, the train would stop at
a station. All I recall is that I was either switching on the bright electric
lights (the carriage had its own generator) or switching them off, I assume
because the sun was shining. But it never seemed to shine for long, an hour
or so, before it was time for me to switch the blindingly bright lights back
on again. Once Pokrovsky took me by the arm, led me to the window and
forced me to drink a glass of some thick brown liquid.
   ‘Be strong,’ he said. ‘It’s almost over. I can’t spare a single one of you.’
   And I stayed strong and stuck it out, stopping only to change my blood-
soaked smock from time to time. The wounded kept coming and coming.
By now we could no longer tell them apart. They all seemed to have the
same unshaven, greenish faces, and the same eyes, white and bulging with
pain, the same rapid, helpless breathing, and the same prehensile steel
fingers, which they jabbed into our arms when we tried to hold them down
during surgery. All of our arms were covered with scratches and bruises. I
left the train only once at some anonymous Polish station for a cigarette. It
was evening and it had just stopped raining. Puddles glittered on the
platform. Like a giant bunch of grapes, a storm cloud, tinged pink by the
afterglow of the setting sun, hung in a greenish sky. A crowd of women and
children had gathered around the train. The women were wiping their eyes
with the edges of their kerchiefs. ‘Why are they crying?’ I wondered,
confused, until I heard the faint moans coming from the carriages.
   The entire train was ceaselessly, wearily moaning. No mother’s heart
could hold out against this muted cry for help and pity without bursting into
tears. Every wounded man became a child again, and it is no surprise that
during their fevered nights and amid their agonising pain they called for
their mothers. Their mothers weren’t there, however, and no one could
replace them, not even the most selfless nurses. Compassion flowed from
these women’s warm and gentle hands as they lovingly touched the men’s
torn flesh, their rotting wounds, their matted hair.
   I don’t recall how many days and nights we travelled before reaching
Lublin one morning at dawn. Three empty hospital trains were waiting for
us there. They took our wounded and left with them for Russia, while we
remained in Lublin. We were given three days’ leave.
   I walked along the tracks to the station pump and washed myself for a
long time under the spout’s heavy, foaming stream. It was a long shower
because I kept dozing off. Fleeting dreams of the smell of water and
Marseilles soap filled my head. I changed my clothes and went out. In front
of the station stood a tall row of lilacs. And there were flowers whose
names I didn’t know; they reminded me of girls in calico dresses of violet
and white. I sat down on a wooden bench, leaned back and began to drift
off while gazing at the town. It stood before me on a small green hill,
surrounded by fields and bathed in morning light. The sun sparkled in a
pure blue sky. I could hear the sound of the town’s silver church bells. It
was Good Friday. I fell asleep. The sun beat down on me, but I didn’t notice
a thing.
   A little old man in a stiff collar yellow with age had sat down on the
bench next to me. He opened his umbrella and held it over me to shield my
eyes from the sun. I don’t know how long he had been sitting there before I
awoke. By then, the sun was already quite high in the sky. The kind old
man stood up, tipped his bowler, said ‘Przepraszam’ – ‘Excuse me’ – and
left.
   Who was he? A retired schoolmaster or railway booking clerk? A church
organist? Whoever he was, I have remained grateful to him for not
forgetting the claims of ordinary human kindness in wartime. He appeared
like some benevolent ancient ghost out of the shady streets of Lublin, the
same streets that were home to retired civil servants, living out their poor
and tidy lives, and where a man might find his last bit of remaining joy in a
bed of scarlet geraniums blooming along a wooden fence or in a box of
cigarettes smelling of fragrant Crimean tobacco. This was all that was left
to him. His children had grown up and moved away, his wife had died long
ago, and the old copies of The Planted Field and Illustrated Quarterly on
the shelf had been read and reread several times over. Everything had
passed on. All that remained was silent wisdom, the trail of smoke from a
cigarette, and the distant, unchanging sound of church bells ringing on feast
days and for funerals.

                             OceanofPDF.com
51
Spring on the Vepsh



Silence is especially precious in wartime.
    Lublin was full of silence. The noisy war hurried by, just like the troop
trains which raced through, barely pausing at the station. Lublin station was
thick with tobacco smoke, it clanged with mess tins, and echoed with the
sound of tramping boots and the rattle of rifles. But if you just walked a
little way up the main street into town, you found yourself enveloped in
silence and the smell of lilacs. You could take off your cap, rub the red
mark it had left on your forehead, take a deep breath and say to yourself:
‘What kind of crazy nonsense is this! There’s no war on, and I doubt there
ever was!’
    You could look up and see swifts darting over the rooftops. Thin clouds
drifted from one distant blue horizon to another without depriving the earth
of a single ray of sun. The sunshine filtered through the heart-shaped leaves
of the lilac trees and touched the paving stones with a bit of their springtime
warmth. In the Saxon Garden a brass band rehearsed a few opera selections.
The music carried far in the silence that hung over the city. In a side street
down by the river, between the kitchen gardens and some narrow gates,
came the sound of a familiar melody: ‘He’s far away, your young groom,
far away in some foreign land . . .’ Wrought-iron lanterns hung over the
gates. Lilacs crowded against the railing. The silver church bells rang all
day long from morning until night.
    We were in Lublin for Easter. Feast days took the place of the commotion
and dust of the recent battle. Nevertheless, we were still finding in our now
scrubbed and tidy train a wad of blood-stained gauze behind a brake handle
or a cigarette butt chewed to pulp by some poor man in pain overlooked in
the corner of one of the carriages.
    We went to the midnight service in the Bernadine Church. It was all very
theatrical: the altar boys in their lace, the mounds of lilacs piled before the
wooden statue of the Infant Jesus draped in blue brocade, the grey-haired
priests, the nasal drone of the Latin chants, the thunderous peals of the
organ.
   The eyes of the praying women spoke of only one thing – their fervent
expectation of a miracle, their enormous hope that just maybe this infant or
that pale woman with the thick eyelashes, the mother of this little child,
would banish war, endless toil and poverty from this world, so that they
could straighten up at last from their washtubs and smile at the sun playing
upon the soapy water.
   Religion was their self-deception. It was a world of fruitless make-
believe for weary people. They could see no other way out of their troubles
and so despite common sense and their own life experiences they believed
with a burning fanaticism that justice was incarnate in the person of this
poor soul from Galilee, in the person of God. But for some reason this God,
invented by people in order to make sense of the bloody and harsh muddle
of human existence, never came, or spoke, or helped in their lives. Yet they
still believed in him, even though their God’s inaction had lasted for
centuries. So great was their longing for happiness that they looked for its
poetry in religion, in the sobs of the organ, in the smoke of incense, in
solemn incantations.
   On the first day of Easter Lëlya, Romanin and I walked far out of town to
the banks of the river Vepsh. Its clear water flowed between fields of wheat.
In the depths of the water the reeds looked like black walls. Small marsh
birds fluttered about above the grasses along the banks. It was pleasant to
walk along this firm road through the fields in a foreign land with no idea
where it was leading us. Wild flowers waved on either side, and we watched
snowy mountain ranges of clouds form in the deep sky overhead. And no
one – not then on the Vepsh, not later in life – has ever been able to explain
to me why sudden waves of happiness come to us at moments when nothing
out of the ordinary has just happened. I was truly happy that day.
   We came upon a hut with a thatched roof by the Vepsh. A fishing net
hung on the fence. Brown reed warblers were busy picking at the dry weeds
caught in the net. We startled the birds, and the flapping of their wings
woke a baby asleep in a wicker basket below the window. The baby began
to cry. A peasant woman in a striped skirt came out of the hut. Upon seeing
us, she stopped, her hands pressed to her chest. An old dog dragged itself
out from under a broken tub, walked to the basket and peered inside with a
look of surprise. Convinced everything was in order, it yawned, sat down
and began scratching at its fleas, the entire time keeping its tired yellow
eyes trained on us.
   ‘Shoo!’ the woman said quietly to the dog. She picked up her baby and
turned to us with such a warm smile that we smiled back, even though we
could say nothing and so just stood there in silence.
   The woman asked us shyly to come in and have some milk. We thanked
her and followed her into the hut. Everything inside was made of wood –
not only the walls, floors, table, benches and bedstead, but also the plates,
the hackle on the sill, the salt cellar and the lamp in front of the icon. A
wooden fork lay on another windowsill. These wooden things accentuated
the air of poverty and cleanliness.
   Lëlya took the baby while the woman went down into the cellar to fetch a
sweaty pitcher of milk. She wiped the table with a cloth, and as she leaned
over her golden hair caught the sunlight. I looked at her fine, wavy hair. She
felt my gaze and looked up. There was embarrassment in her soft green
eyes. This, and other things as well, told me that a quiet happiness dwelled
in her home. For some reason the thought struck me when I looked up at the
ceiling. There was a small chandelier with thin wax candles. It had been
woven from dry flowers. The unlit candles had been stuck into large
crimson thistle heads that served as holders.
   ‘What’s this?’ I asked the woman. ‘It’s delightful!’
   ‘It’s just for fun,’ she said, blushing. ‘You can’t light it. My husband
made it to bring a little joy into our home. He’s a basket weaver. He makes
reed baskets and stools. He also just made a parasol for Panna Yavorskaya.’
   Romanin had never heard of a parasol and was amazed when we told him
what it was.
   Just then the door opened, and a tall young peasant stood on the doorstep.
He wore a sleeveless white leather coat with green embroidering over his
shoulders. He was very thin and had a shy smile like his wife.
   ‘Here’s Stas, my husband,’ she said. ‘He’s not like all the others.’
   He bowed silently, placed his basket of bast in the corner, sat down at the
table and then gave each of us a long look, smiling the entire time. Through
the open window we could hear the larks and see them, flapping their
wings, as they flew up from the green wheat into the blue sky. Stas looked
out of the window and grinned. ‘Our helpers,’ he said. ‘The larks.’
   ‘Why helpers?’ asked Lëlya.
   ‘They cheer folks up when they’re at work,’ he said, still grinning
warmly. ‘I’ve never seen it, but they say there’s a lark with a golden beak.
He’s their leader.’
   ‘Oh, Stas!’ his wife said. ‘Whoever made that up?’
   ‘That’s what people say,’ Stas said. ‘Just maybe the larks will save us
from the war, just like they did in the days of King Yanko the Ferocious.’
   ‘People don’t want to listen to old fairytales,’ she told him.
   Stas said nothing. He just sat there smiling and drumming his fingers on
the table.
   ‘Well,’ he went on after a while, ‘they don’t have to believe it if they
don’t want to. But those who do believe it may just find their life on this
earth a bit easier to bear.
   ‘King Yanko the Ferocious went to war against a neighbouring kingdom,
and this kingdom was made up of nothing but peasants who kept
themselves busy by ploughing the fields and harvesting their crops. They
went to fight Yanko’s knights dressed in their white smocks and armed with
nothing but their pitchforks. But the knights had brass breastplates and
brass trumpets and their swords had been sharpened on both sides and could
split an ox in two in a single blow. It was an unjust war, so unjust that the
ground refused to accept the men’s blood. It just ran over the ground to the
rivers as if it had been spilled onto glass. The peasants died in their
hundreds, their huts were burned to the ground, their widows went mad
from grief.
   ‘Now there lived among the peasants an old hunchbacked fiddler. He
played his homemade fiddle at weddings. And this hunchback said: “There
are many different birds in this world, even birds of paradise, but the best of
them all is the lark. Because he’s a friend of the peasant. He sings for the
sowing, and so that our harvests are rich and bountiful. He sings to the
ploughman to lighten his work, and he sings louder than the reapers’
scythes to make them forget about their labours and so gladden their hearts.
The larks have a leader among them – he’s the smallest and youngest
among them and he has a beak of gold. You must send to him for help. He
won’t let the peasants be mown down. He’ll save all of us, brothers, and our
wives and children and our green fields.” So the peasants sent messengers
to the lark.’
   ‘What sort of messengers?’ asked his wife.
   ‘All kinds. Sparrows and swallows and even a bald woodpecker – the
very one that pecked a hole right through the wooden cross in the church at
Lyubartov. And so,’ here Stas gave us a wily look, ‘the larks came flying to
the peasant kingdom in their thousands. They landed on the rooftops and
said to the women: “You, mothers and wives, you, sisters and sweethearts,
what would you give to end this war?”
   ‘“Everything,” they shouted. “Take everything, down to the last crumb.”
   ‘“Well then,” said the larks, “if you really mean it, go now and gather all
your knitting wool and your embroidery thread hidden away in every last
room and carry it out to the common beyond the village.”
   ‘The women did as they were told. In the middle of the night, thousands
of larks landed on the common, picked up the skeins of thread and wool and
flew to the camp of King Yanko the Ferocious and began to circle in thick
clouds around his knights, unwinding the skeins and tying up the soldiers in
these threads just like a spider does a fly in its web. At first the knights
managed to rip the threads, but the larks flew faster and faster and wrapped
them tighter and tighter until the knights fell to the ground and could move
neither their hands nor their feet and began choking on the wool in their
mouths. Then the peasants came, removed the knights’ breast-plates, took
their swords, loaded the soldiers into carts, took them back over the border,
and then tossed them into a ravine like so much rubbish. As for King Yanko
the Ferocious, he swallowed so much wool that he turned blue in the face
and choked to death, to the joy of all good people.’
   Stas paused.
   ‘And so, gentlemen,’ he said, laughing, ‘we ought to go and find that lark
with the golden beak.’
   We left the hut early that evening. Stas’s wife accompanied us to the
main road back to Lublin. Stas stayed at home. He stood by the door
smoking his pipe and watching us go. The woman was carrying her child
and told us that Stas was not at all like others and we mustn’t take offence
at what he said. We said goodbye at the crossroads.
   The sun was setting beyond the Vepsh. Rising to replace it above the
silent woods and fields, a sliver of a moon shone silver in the darkening
sky.
   The woman gave me her hand. I don’t know why but I bowed and then
kissed this rough hand that smelled of bread. She didn’t snatch it away.
‘Thank you,’ she said simply, raising her eyes to me. ‘Please come back and
see us again. I’ll bake you some flatbreads and Stas will get some fish from
the Vepsh.’
   We promised to come back, but the next day our train was sent to Sedltse
and from there on to Warsaw, and I never saw Stas, the young woman or
their baby again. For a long time I felt a gnawing regret, even though I
don’t know why. Perhaps it was because I, along with so many of my
generation, felt the want in those days of the simple happiness that this
affectionate Polish peasant woman so obviously possessed.

                             OceanofPDF.com
52
The Great Swindler



During one of our stops in Brest a smart-looking lieutenant with a rimless
pince-nez and a limp came to call on Dr Pokrovsky. Lieutenant Sokolovsky
told a rather common story. He had been wounded and now, released from
hospital, he had three months’ convalescent leave, yet since he had no
relations and nowhere to go, he asked whether we might take him on as an
orderly on the train for the next three months. He said that despite his limp,
he felt just fine. All Sokolovsky’s papers were in order, and so Dr
Pokrovsky agreed to take him on and brought him to the staff room. We
students had a deep distrust of all officers and so were immediately on our
guard. Had he been a mere ensign, we would have got on with him, but a
lieutenant was a different matter.
   From the moment of Sokolovsky’s arrival, wonders began. ‘This is no
way to live, you monks!’ he said in a loud voice. ‘Call that a clean floor?
Go and fetch me two buckets of water, one hot, the other cold, you
bookworms, and I’ll teach you how to scrub a floor. Well, hop to it! Two
pails of water, and no answering back!’
   Nobody moved. We all just stared at Sokolovsky without saying a word.
   ‘Too proud, are you?’ he said in a derisive tone. ‘Well, I’m proud too, but
I’ll show you just the same.’
   He took off his tunic with its St George’s cross and in nothing but a white
shirt and a pair of sky-blue braces marched off to the kitchen. He soon
returned with two buckets of water. Yelling at us to pick up our feet, he
began scrubbing the floors in the carriage and did such an excellent job of it
that we had to admit that he truly was an expert in this business.
   What followed was even more inexplicable.
   Sokolovsky took Lyakhman’s guitar down off the wall, strummed a few
chords and then launched into a plaintive Georgian song. Next he sang an
Armenian song, followed by Ukrainian, Jewish, Polish, Finnish and Latvian
numbers, before finishing this concert with a virtuoso performance of ‘A
Pair of Bays’ in Gypsy style, complete with hoots and hollers.
   It turned out that Sokolovsky was fluent in a number of languages and
knew every last corner of Russia intimately. There was no town he had not
visited and whose inhabitants of note he was not acquainted with. These
strange qualities made us even more suspicious of Sokolovsky, especially
after he forged Dr Pokrovsky’s signature and medical stamp on a
prescription to purchase a bottle of pure alcohol from the local chemist and
then proceeded to drink it down in one night.
   ‘Take care, my friends,’ said orderly Grekov, a taciturn student from
Moscow. ‘Fate has brought a sinister character our way. We must be
prepared for any disasters. It’s imperative we find out what he was doing
before the war.’
   Romanin put the question to Sokolovsky that very day. Sokolovsky
narrowed his handsome yet insolent eyes. He stared at Romanin for a long
time before answering in a quiet, threatening voice: ‘Ah, so that’s it! You
want to know what I was doing back then? Well, I was a cantor in a
synagogue. That’s one! A sword swallower in the circus. Two! A
photographer at the Imperial Court. Three! And, by the way, I was also
Prince Mikhail Shervashidze, ruler of Abkhazia. Satisfied? Or would you
like to hear more? Then I shall confess to you, my dear colleagues, that I
was also a gynaecologist and the leader of the Gypsy choir at the Yar.1 Any
more questions?’
   No one said a word. Sokolovsky gave a good-natured laugh and threw his
arms around Romanin’s shoulders. ‘Come on now, I was nothing more than
a travelling salesman, hence all my talents, although I could have been a
student, just like you.’
   Sokolovsky was obviously making fun of us. He tried to come across as
relaxed and jovial but was now so pale with anger that the small white scar
on his lip had ceased to show.
   The wonders continued. No matter what the card game, be it snap or
Polish faro, Sokolovsky always won. It wasn’t long before he admitted to
being an expert card sharper and gave us a lecture on the art of cheating,
complete with historical references and practical demonstrations.
Sokolovsky picked up a batch of cards with two fingers and said: ‘Here I
hold nineteen cards. Please check for yourselves, gentlemen!’
   We counted. Sokolovsky played this little trick more than once, and
every time he was right. It was incomprehensible, beyond anything we had
ever encountered before, it made no sense and left us confused and
exhausted. Everything to do with Sokolovsky gave us a headache. His tricks
became ever stranger. Sokolovsky would place a box of matches or cigars
on the bed and instruct us not to take our eyes off it, but somehow it would
vanish into thin air right in front of us. Sokolovsky sat there the whole time
with his hands in the pockets of his breeches, before miraculously removing
the box from the pocket of one of us orderlies.
   ‘Nothing to get excited about!’ he would say. ‘Basic stuff, really. The fact
is the human eye is a crude instrument capable of capturing only slow
movements. Certain speeds are simply beyond its power of perception. I
trained my hands for ten years to acquire such speed. Ten years, mind you!
That’s a lot more work than poring over some old books on Roman law or
histology. Yes, sir! Vaudeville is truly something, all the rest is nonsense!’2
   The front was quiet at the time. There were few wounded to look after,
but a great many sick, especially epileptics. In those days one rarely heard
the word ‘epilepsy’. The disease was largely known by its popular name –
‘falling sickness’. Epileptics were forbidden from being transported with
the wounded. They were collected into groups at the field hospitals and then
sent together by a separate train to the rear. This was an unpleasant and
difficult business, and so the field hospitals came up with various tricks to
get rid of the epileptics as quickly as possible. They bandaged the men’s
arms and legs, even put them in splints or plaster casts, and sent them off on
the hospital trains together with the wounded. Yet on the journey these men
began suffering from fits, which drove nearly every man in the carriage out
of his mind with terror.
   Our doctors tried their best to separate the epileptics from the wounded
before they were loaded onto the trains and could be sent back to the
hospitals. They were rarely successful since the epileptics presented no
outward signs of their illness. Sokolovsky offered to help the doctors. He
asked Pokrovsky for permission to accompany the doctors as they made
their inspections before the trains left the station. Pokrovsky laughed, but
agreed – he too was intrigued by this unusual orderly. And so began the
‘historic’ inspection. Sokolovsky entered one of the carriages with the
doctors. He quickly cast his eyes over the wounded men and then said to
one greybeard with a bandaged arm: ‘You, fellow, over here!’
   The soldier got up from his bed and walked over.
   ‘All right, let me have a look at you!’ Sokolovsky ordered. His burning
eyes penetrated the nervous soldier. ‘Don’t avert your eyes. It won’t do any
good.’
   Sokolovsky drew up close to the soldier and asked in a soft,
compassionate voice too low for any of the other wounded to hear: ‘Got the
falling sickness?’
   The soldier shuddered and his face dropped. ‘Yes, sir,’ he pleaded in a
whisper. ‘But it’s not my fault.’
   ‘Then get out of this carriage!’
   In this manner Sokolovsky uncovered seven epileptics on this single run
and they were returned to the hospital. After that, the hospital authorities
didn’t dare try to sneak any more epileptics onto our trains.
   ‘Who is this?’ they asked us. ‘Is he really a clairvoyant or just some
swindler? Just how’s he able to do this?’
   Sokolovsky replied to the doctors’ questions with a polite smile. ‘I can’t
tell you a thing. Believe me when I say I have no idea how I do it.’
   Most of the orderlies and doctors treated Sokolovsky with friendly
curiosity. They were amused by this undeniably talented but odd and empty
man. Others, however, such as Romanin and myself, found having to deal
with him upsetting. We were repelled by his ceaseless clowning, his
bragging, his cold cynicism and his incessant noise making. What I came to
find most surprising was that in the depths of the eyes of this man, who had
evidently been brought up on barracks humour, one could at times catch a
glimpse of a timid, doglike appeal for pity. Where had he come from? What
sort of social milieu or set of circumstances creates such people?
   I never once saw Sokolovsky sad or depressed. Ever since I have been
convinced that the capacity to feel sadness is one of the things that define
being fully human. Someone who is incapable of feeling grief is just as
pitiful as someone who has no understanding of what joy is or has lost all
sense of humour. The lack of any one of these qualities attests to an
irreparable spiritual deficit. Sokolovsky told me once that his entire life he
had wanted nothing more than to do good for others, but he simply wasn’t
foolish enough for such a thing. I didn’t believe him.
   The unhealthy condition in the train, particularly in the staff room, that
had begun with the appearance of Sokolovsky could not last long. The end
came suddenly.
   One day we stopped in Keltse. The chief doctor let a few of us orderlies
go into town for the evening. The town was dark and deserted. We stopped
at a simple café. It was brightly lit inside and smelled of chocolate; the two
waitresses – sisters – were standing about chattering. The wet night didn’t
appear so depressing now that we were looking out at it through the
window’s dark glass. We sat and quietly drank our coffee. At a far table a
sapper dozed, lulled to sleep by the warmth of the café, the smell of coffee
and vanilla, and the muted voices of the blonde sisters.
   The glass door of the café flew open with a bang and in walked
Sokolovsky. He was without a greatcoat and wore a brand-new uniform of a
cornet in the Hussars. Silver epaulettes flashed on his shoulders. His cavalry
sword clattered on the red brick floor as he walked. We stared at
Sokolovsky in shocked silence. He slowly came over to us. His face was
distorted in a terrible grimace, his eyes were bloodshot. He stopped and
glared at Romanin.
   ‘I didn’t know you were in the Hussars, Sokolovsky,’ said Romanin.
‘Have a seat.’
   ‘Stand up!’ Sokolovsky shouted in a wild voice. ‘Don’t you know to
salute an officer? Forgotten your place, have you, you dogs?’
   ‘Knock it off,’ Romanin said, not too sure of himself. ‘You’re drunk.’
   ‘Shut up!’ roared Sokolovsky, drawing his sword. ‘I’ll cut you into
pieces, you little puppies. I’ll show you who the real Sokolovsky is!’
   He slammed the sword down onto our table. The table split in two and
the cups went flying. The sisters shrieked. The sapper opened his eyes and
jumped. A frenzied Sokolovsky swung the sword at Romanin, but Grekov
hit him in the back with all his might. Sokolovsky fell onto the broken table
and dropped his sword.
   We ran out of the café and took off through some back alleys until we
came to the railway tracks and followed them to our train. We went straight
to Pokrovsky and told him everything that had happened in the café. He
ordered us to lock the staff room for the night and should Sokolovsky
return, not to let him in. We were to report the incident the next morning to
the commandant.
   I went to the operating carriage to sterilise some bandages in preparation
for taking on more wounded the next day. In the middle of the night I heard
someone trying to open the door with a key but I had bolted both locks and
he couldn’t get in. The person fiddled with the key for a long time and then
started tapping at the window. I went over and looked out. There was
Sokolovsky, without his forage cap and with a soldier’s greatcoat thrown
over his shoulders.
   ‘Let me in for the night,’ he said. ‘You’ve got to hide me, friend.’
   ‘No!’ I said. ‘I’m not letting you in.’
   ‘If I had my Nagant right now,’ he said with a twisted grin, ‘I’d blast a
hole in you, you little pup, and send you off to your dead grandmother. Still
not gonna let me in, eh?’
   ‘No.’
   Sokolovsky stepped closer to the window.
   ‘Someday, God willing, we’ll meet again. Take a good look, boy,
remember this face. That might just give you enough time to say a quick
prayer before I drain every last drop of blood from your body.’
   ‘Romanin, come here!’ I called out, even though I knew he wasn’t in his
dispensary.
   Sokolovsky spat hard at the window, stepped back and then disappeared
into the darkness. I put out the light, retrieved the revolver we kept in the
drawer under the bandages and sat up waiting for an attack. But Sokolovsky
never returned. He had vanished. Five or six days later, however, while we
were stopped at Radom, a friendly-looking young peasant appeared, handed
the duty orderly a wooden box wrapped in canvas, and then turned and
walked away. On the box were the words ‘To the Nurses of Field Hospital
Train No. 217’.
   The orderly delivered the box to the head nurse. Removing the canvas
she found written: ‘A pair for each of the nurses. With fond memories,
Lieutenant Sokolovsky.’
   The nurses opened the box. Inside was a collection of small black jewel
boxes lined with lilac-coloured velvet containing a pair of diamond earrings
for every nurse. Pokrovsky immediately ordered they be handed over to the
station commandant.
   Three days later we read in a small Brest newspaper about an unusually
violent robbery of a jewellery store in Vilnius. That same day the
commandant came to see Pokrovsky and asked: ‘Did you employ an orderly
who went by the name of Sokolovsky?’
   ‘Yes, he worked for me.’
   ‘Where’s he now?’
   ‘I don’t know.’
   ‘You should try to find out.’
   ‘Why?’
   ‘Because he’s rather big game.’
   ‘But I’m no hunter,’ Pokrovsky answered with a laugh.
   ‘Too bad!’ the commandant said mysteriously and then walked off
without bothering to explain what he had meant or say what he knew about
Sokolovsky.
   We came up with all sorts of theories in light of his comment, but then,
with time, forgot all about Sokolovsky. It was not until two years later that I
heard his name again. I was working at the time at the Novorossiisk Factory
in the smoky town of Yuzovka in the Don Basin. We had a draughtsman in
our workshop named Grinko, a former Socialist Revolutionary. He was a
pale, tubercular fellow who went around in a floppy hat and with a
dismissive air of irony towards everything around him. I was living in a
cheap room at the Hotel Great Britain. It was in that musty room that
Grinko told me how a court in Yekaterinoslav had sentenced him to five
years’ exile in Siberia for his membership of the Socialist Revolutionary
Party.
   On the way to Siberia, in Kharkov, their convict train stopped to pick up
a young man in irons and a rimless pince-nez. The carriage was full of petty
thieves and other riff-raff. The young man gave them one look and said
‘Well?’ The riff-raff stopped talking at once and cleared out an entire
compartment for him, even though the carriage was crammed with convicts,
and afterwards did everything possible to win his approval. The
draughtsman noticed that even the guards treated the young man with a
certain respect and did him favours.
   The man in irons invited Grinko into his compartment, where he said that
he too was an educated man, fluent in several languages, and a lover of
music. Grinko told the man of his misfortunes. He listened carefully, then
leaned in and said in a whisper: ‘I’ll get you out.’
   ‘How?’
   ‘No lie! It’s ridiculous to spend two years in Siberia on such an idiotic
charge. Two years of exile would do you in.’
   He asked Grinko to tell him all about his case, which he did, even though
he didn’t believe that this convict in irons could do anything to help. He
assumed the man was just bragging for the sake of it.
   But then at some small junction in the province of Penza the train
stopped. An officer of the gendarmes boarded carrying with him a telegram
sent from Yekaterinoslav ordering that, after further examination into the
case of Grinko, he was to be removed from the train and sent to the town of
Narovchat and there held in prison until further instruction. As they
removed Grinko from the train, the man in irons gave him a wink and told
him in the future ‘to be more cautious on the turns’.
   Grinko did not stay long in the remote prison at Narovchat. Soon another
telegram arrived from the court in Yekaterinoslav stating that the
draughtsman had been retried in absentia and acquitted for lack of
evidence. The prison warden shook Grinko’s hand and wished him well. Yet
as soon as Grinko arrived back at Yekaterinoslav station, he was arrested
and charged with attempted escape. It was only then that Grinko realised
that this entire complicated business of his ‘release’ had been organised by
the young man in irons.
   ‘He’s a well-known criminal,’ the draughtsman told me. ‘The head of a
powerful organisation of thieves and forgers. Apparently, he had bribed one
of the guards to send a message about me to one of his people in Kursk. It
was all done with great care and precision, and I, like a fool, fell right into
their little trap and so was arrested a second time.’
   ‘Tell me,’ I said, ‘did this young man in irons have any distinguishing
marks on him?’
   ‘He had a scar on his lip. His name was Sokolovsky. And he had a limp.’
   And so I told him about the mysterious orderly by the name of
Sokolovsky.
   ‘That’s him!’ said Grinko. ‘He must have been hiding from the police,
and your train was the perfect place.’
   ‘But why did he use his real name?’
   ‘Because there are thousands and thousands of Sokolovskys. And
besides, men like him sometimes like to play with fire and tempt fate.’
   Over the course of many years I became convinced that every encounter
leaves its trace, even an encounter with such a man as Sokolovsky. From
some of the hints he dropped I guessed that even as a child he had suffered
more than his share of injustices. Embittered, he invested all his talents in
avenging his humiliations no matter what the cost.
1   Popular Moscow restaurant in the early 1900s known for its Gypsy choir.
2   Oft-quoted line from Griboedov’s Woe from Wit.

                              OceanofPDF.com
53
The Ocean Liner Portugal



The summer of 1915 was hot and dry. From the windows of the train we
watched brown curtains of dust sweep over the fields of Poland. The army
was retreating. The dust of defeat, with its bitter smell of charred ruins,
covered everything – the soldiers’ faces, the grain in the fields, the guns, the
train. Our red goods wagons had turned grey. Now we never stopped
anywhere for longer than three or four hours. The train was in constant
motion. The wounded kept coming. Once we stopped to pick up some
wounded men along the right bank of the Vistula in Praga, a suburb of
Warsaw. Fighting was taking place in a section of the city near the
Mokotów Gates. Small fires reflected off the waters of the Vistula. Smoke
and darkness had settled over the houses. Gunshots crackled on the far side
of the river. It sounded as if someone were tearing heavy cloth in short,
violent bursts.
   The wind was blowing from the east. It filled Praga with the fresh air of
the night. But the train held onto the hot stuffy air of the day, especially in
my operating carriage, whose windows were sealed up tight; the smell of
dressing and bandages had no escape. At the time we were carrying
casualties from Poland to Gomel. As soon as the train reached Polesia, the
air became fresh again. The damp forests and quiet rivers of Belorussia
seemed to us a cool paradise. The wounded men came to life and lifted their
heads to gaze at the rustling groves of aspen or the evening sky as it faded
to green.
   By the middle of summer, the train had become so worn out that it was
ordered to the railway workshops in Odessa for urgent repairs. We went
through Kiev, the city of my childhood. I saw it once again from a siding at
dawn. The sun was already gilding the tops of the poplars and burned in the
windows of the tall houses built from the yellow Kiev brick. I recalled the
city’s morning streets, freshly sprinkled and still full of shadows, its
housewives carrying home warm rolls and bottles of cold milk in their bags.
But for some reason nothing tugged at me to return to the coolness of these
streets – Kiev had receded into the irredeemable past. The past was gone for
good reason. I convinced myself of this later on the two or three occasions
when I tried to relive it. ‘Nothing in life ever returns,’ Father loved to say,
‘except our mistakes.’ And the fact that nothing in life ever does repeat
itself is one of the things that makes our existence so endlessly fascinating.
   After Kiev the soft, sun-drenched hills of Ukraine rolled by our windows.
Somehow the smell of marigolds, growing in yellow clumps around every
crossing keeper’s hut, managed to find its way into the train. The steppes,
cut by golden swathes of sunflowers, stretched out before us. All day long
the air in the glassy distance shimmered through a film of haze. I tried to
convince Romanin that the lustre spreading across the horizon was caused
by reflections, high up in the atmosphere, of the sun’s rays refracting off the
sea. For once Romanin neither argued nor made fun of me. Instead, he
recited at the top of his voice in the dispensary:

       Behold the sea, a turquoise flame,
       How it glistens, its foam so pearly.
       Wave after wave, each the same,
       Crashes on its banks, so troubled, so heavy.1

   I woke up outside Odessa. The train was standing at a halt. I jumped
from the platform onto the railway bed. Cockle shells crunched under my
feet. I saw the halt’s small station building with its red-tiled roof. Tall maize
was growing up beside a white wall; the wind ruffled its long leaves. The
red of the roof and the green of the corn highlighted the sky’s magnificent
blue.
   ‘Now that truly does look like the sun’s reflection off the sea,’ Romanin
said to me, poking his head out the window.
   There was the smell of sage. It was then that this bitter smell became
forever associated in my mind with the Black Sea. Sage and sea became so
linked in my imagination that later, even in the north, when I caught the
scent of sage I would involuntarily listen for the distant sound of the sea.
Sometimes I actually thought I heard it, only to realise that this was the
wind in the pines, not the waves crashing against the shore. I was happy to
know that in a few hours I would be back by the sea. Ever since childhood,
its cheerful, frothy vastness had imprinted itself on my soul.
   We stopped to unload at the goods yard in Odessa. From there, the sea
was not visible; all I could see was the main railway station, gleaming
brightly in the distance. Nonetheless, everything around me seemed touched
by the sea; even the puddles of oil on the tracks were shot with the blue of
its waters. Some old buffers from a scrapped engine lying on the ground
were covered with ship’s rust, or so it seemed to me at the time.
   We orderlies were billeted in an old third-class passenger carriage. We
quickly moved our things. A shunting engine then nudged our carriage out
of the way, finally depositing us alongside a low fence surrounding an
abandoned garden, and here we remained for our entire stay in Odessa. We
liked our new home. In the mornings we washed at the water pump next to
our train. The wispy shadows of the acacias caressed our windows.
   From the other side of the garden came the sounds of a small market and
beyond that lay the Odessa suburb of Moldavanka – the refuge of thieves,
fences, swindlers, barrow boys and a great many other characters of
dubious and murky occupation. The doctors and nurses had been put up at a
country house in the Maly Fontan area not far from the city centre. We
visited them almost every day.
   I didn’t manage to get a look at the sea the day we arrived. The following
day, I rose very early, bathed in the salty water alongside the tracks, and
headed for the market for a glass of milk and something to eat. The market
women sat on their stools with their sleeves rolled up and their faces red
from the heat and from shouting. All day long they quarrelled and chattered
among themselves and called out to customers, either beckoning them to
their stalls or making fun of them. They swore at each other in intentionally
shrill voices, one minute forgetting their own quarrels to mock the
customers, then the next trying to ingratiate themselves, and at times even
flirting with them, and all of this done in a friendly sort of way.
   ‘My boy!’ they cried to me. ‘Try some of my baked milk! It still has the
skin on it! You know your dear sweet mama told you to drink milk with the
skin on it!’
   ‘Toasted sunflower seeds! Sunflower seeds!’ cried others. ‘A pocketful
for a kopeck! Just one old kopeck!’
   The row of fishmongers was the most interesting. I loved to just stand
there next to the cold zinc counters covered with fish scales and sprinkled
with rock salt. Large flat turbot, bony purplish growths covering their
backs, stared up at the sky with dimming eyes. Mackerel thrashed about in
wet baskets, looking like blue mercury. Brown perch slowly opened their
mouths and smacked their lips, as if tasting the market’s morning freshness.
Bullheads were piled high – black ‘stonefish’, yellow ‘sandfish’ and reddish
‘whips’. A group of especially ingratiating market women sat around a few
baskets of tiny fish called firinka. Women bought them as cat food, but that
was it.
   ‘For your little kitties, ladies! For your kitty-cats!’ they called, doing
their best to coax the housewives at the market.
   Carts stood piled high with mountains of apricots and cherries. The
owners of these riches, German colonists from Lustdorf and Liebenthal, lay
asleep, snoring in the warm dust under their carts, while little Jewish boys
from the cheder, hired to sell the fruit, sat up on top, their eyes closed, and,
rocking to and fro as if in prayer, chanted plaintively: ‘Ai, ai, good people,
ai, ai, good gentlemen! Cherries! Cherries and sweet apricots! Ai, ai, just
five kopecks a pound! We’re giving them away! Ai, ai, good people, step up
and buy, step up and try! Come, eat, eat!’
   The ground was littered with apricot stones and cherry pits and bloody
red pulp. I bought some raisin bread and walked over to the far edge of the
market to eat next to a stand where Ukrainian sausages sizzled in frying
pans and the unbearable Black Sea sun reflected off a line of boiling, dented
old samovars set out on large tables. I sat down at the table. Its homespun
tablecloth contained a message embroidered in cross-stitch: ‘Little Raichka,
never forget your native Ovidiopol’. In the middle of the table peonies
floated in a blue bowl of chipped enamel.
   Having finished a plate of sausages and turning to my cup of hot, sweet
tea, I decided that life in Odessa was beautiful. Just then a lean man in a
sailor’s cap with a cracked leather peak sat down next to me. The sides of
his ashen face were covered by stiff yellow whiskers that bristled like a
lynx.
   ‘Excuse me, young man,’ he asked in a hushed voice, as if he were
plotting something, ‘might you be an orderly?’
   ‘Yes, I am.’
   ‘From the train that arrived yesterday for repairs?’
   ‘Yes, from that very train,’ I answered, surprised by this all-knowing
stranger in the broken cap.
   ‘Then allow me to introduce myself,’ he said, raising his cap with both
hands and then placing it back down over his bald head. ‘Aristarkh
Lipogon, retired coastal skipper and born sailor, at your service.’
   ‘What’re you pestering the young man for?’ shouted a red-faced market
woman who had served my tea. ‘Leave him be!’
   ‘Auntie Raichka,’ the born sailor replied with extreme politeness, ‘what
gives you the damned idea you can go butting into other folks’ business?
Why are you trying to steal every last crumb of bread out of my mouth?
You, one can see, are fat and doing just fine, while I’m as hungry as an
empty barrel. Understand?’
   Auntie Raichka grumbled a bit but then stopped talking.
   ‘I’m pleased to be of assistance,’ Lipogon said. ‘I never shrink from
offering whatever services might be required, be they for yourself or for
your doctors who have taken up residence in that luxurious Bykhovsky
country house in Maly Fontan. I work fast and cheap.’
   ‘And what exactly is it that you do “fast and cheap”?’ I asked.
   ‘I can get my hands on anything you might wish and deliver it to your
carriage. Tobacco, for example, straight from Constantinople, and free of
any import duty. But it wouldn’t be right to call it tobacco. Finely spun curls
of gold would be more like it. Or maybe some nice, powdery French
cocaine, or Greek vodka, or Messina oranges of the rarest aroma and
flavour. And then there’s fresh tinned goods, bullfish in tomato sauce,
canned this very day and straight from our Odessa factory. By the second
day they’ve already lost a bit of their divine taste. I highly recommend! I
have the widest network of contacts in the city and the port. You can ask
anyone, and if he’s an honest man he’ll tell you: “Lipogon can do anything.
Lipogon has twenty legs, forty hands and a hundred eyes.”’
   ‘But just one tongue, you crook!’ Auntie Raichka said crossly. ‘Just one
tongue, like every mortal, but you wag it enough for seven.’
   I told Lipogon that I didn’t need anything, but maybe the doctors and
nurses might. I would ask them.
   ‘As it happens,’ said Lipogon, ‘I’m calling on them tonight. Nice
meeting you, young man.’
   Once more he raised his battered cap with both hands and then set it back
down on his bald head before walking off, swinging his coat tails and
singing casually:
        There was a midshipman, young and fair,
        Brown as the earth was his hair,
        Odessa he did up and leave, that very city
        He’d always found so pretty . . .

   ‘You have there before you, my son,’ said Auntie Raichka, ‘the perfect
example of how too much imagination can ruin a man.’
   ‘What do you mean?’ I asked, surprised.
   ‘There was a time’, she replied sadly, ‘when that man lived well. He
sailed his little boat back and forth from Kherson to Odessa carrying
watermelons to market. He wore a decent suit, had enough to eat every day,
and an extra twenty in his pocket. But no! That wasn’t enough for him! I
know him well, ever since we were children back in Ovidiopol. He lived
next door to me. Never was satisfied to live life like the rest of us. “I can’t
stand it, Raichka,” he’d say, “this boring grey existence is crushing my soul.
Raichka, I want to live like they do in novels – full of tears and flowers,
overflowing with music and passionate love. I have to risk it all, just like
the writers describe it. I’ll either make it rich or be destroyed!”’
   ‘And we certainly know how that turned out!’ sighed another market
woman, laying out her bluish aubergines along the ground. ‘He was
destroyed!’
   ‘What happened?’ I asked.
   ‘He got married,’ said Auntie Raichka, ‘but just you listen how, and to
whom! We used to have a Romanian orchestra here in Odessa. It wasn’t
really Romanian, but folks from all over. Some from the Caucasus, some
from Kishinëv, some even from right here in Moldavanka. Well, there was
this woman, Tamara, the orchestra’s cymbalist. She was beautiful, striking
even, that’s the truth. So, he went and married her. He’d been dazzled by all
the glitter, I guess, all the sequins, the velvet, the cymbals, the waltzes. “I’ll
give her such a life,” he said, “that Vera Kholodnaya herself will be green
with envy.”’2
   ‘He did that all right!’ the aubergine seller chimed in.
   ‘Well, he did try to do his best for the woman,’ Auntie Raichka replied in
Lipogon’s defence. ‘And he still does. Since the day of their wedding, he’s
chased after every last kopeck. He even took to smuggling contraband on
his boat. He got caught, of course, and they took away his import licence.
He’d have gone to prison if he hadn’t paid them off. He ended up on the
streets, but still he managed to find a flat for her. And what a flat it was!
More like a box of fancy chocolates all tied up with a pink ribbon and fine
lace! After losing his boat he took to second-hand dealing and accepted all
kinds of petty jobs. His reputation was ruined, and he sank lower and lower.
But he’s never given up on his grand designs. Nothing but lies and more
lies! He hides his poverty from Tamara. She’s a lazy woman and a bit
touched herself. Can’t be bothered with anything. Lies about all day long by
her window reading tattered old books and playing her gramophone. Puts
on a record– ‘The Night’s Breath’ or ‘I Dreamed of You Last Night’ – and
just reads and reads. She’s no good. She doesn’t give a damn about
anything, along as she’s got herself a bit of halva. She doesn’t want to open
her eyes and see how this man has destroyed himself for her, how he’s gone
to the dogs. All she cares about are her stupid romance novels. Tfu! I say, to
hell with her!’
   With that, Auntie Raichka spat crossly. ‘That man will end up in the
army’s penal battalions, mark my words, young man!’
   I went back to my carriage and was about to go down to the seashore
when we were ordered to the railway workshop to help the workers scrape
all the old paint off the train. We worked all day. I went home to clean up
and then left for the country house in Maly Fontan. There at last, from the
top of a cliff, I saw the sea. The evening’s misty haze had merged with the
pale blue expanse of the water. The waves far below rumbled faintly over
the shingle, and the first star of the night began to glow beneath a silver
bird-wing of a cloud.
   The lighthouses were dark. The hulking mass of a ship could still be
made out on the darkening horizon. This was the Turkish cruiser Medjidie,
shelled by our coastal artillery and gone aground on the rocks. It still hadn’t
been towed away. The cruiser was slowly being consumed by the twilight
and before long disappeared.
   I ran down a steep path to the sea. Dry acacias clung to the stony soil.
Large flat stones skittered under my feet. Stiff broom pointed dark arrows
in all directions; yellow flowers shone, somehow, in the darkness. I smelled
mussels and fried mackerel – the nurses were cooking on an open fire near
the house. Reaching the sea, I undressed and walked out into the dark, fresh
water until it was up to my neck. The reflections of the stars swam about
me like tiny jellyfish. I tried not to move to keep them from breaking into
dozens of rocking sparks. It took a long time until they settled down and
reappeared as reflected stars. With all my body I felt the restrained but
powerful pulse of the sea. It rocked back and forth ever so slightly.
   The sea lay just below my eyes, at the level of my chin. My heart
pounded at the thought that before me was nothing but an expanse of water
stretching far into the distance, to the Bosphorus, to the shores of Greece
and Egypt, to the Adriatic and the Atlantic, that before my very eyes began
the great oceans that stretched around the world. The smell of stocks floated
over the water. Far off in the direction of the Dniester estuary, a cannon shot
rang out and echoed along the shore. The war had even made its way to
these lands that seemed to have been created specifically for a happy,
constructive life, the life of sailors, gardeners, winemakers, artists, children
and lovers, lands that promised a carefree childhood, a productive
adulthood and an old age as bright and clear as a September day.
   The nurses called to me from the shore. I got out of the water, dressed,
and went up to the house. There, under the verandah’s striped awning, stood
Lipogon, cap in hand, ingratiating himself with the nurses. He had already
managed to sell them a small canvas bag of Greek olives. We went back to
town together.
   ‘I gather’, Lipogon said to me on the tram, ‘that you’re a true lover of the
sea.’
   I said he was correct.
   ‘Then you shouldn’t be riding about on a train, in those beaten-up old
goods wagons, you belong on a hospital ship. The hospital ship Portugal is
in Odessa harbour right now. It’s an old French steamer.’
   ‘Well, I suppose so,’ I said cautiously, ‘Sure, I’d love to be on that
steamer.’
   ‘I can fix it!’ he said matter-of-factly. ‘I know a way. I am acquainted
with the ship’s junior doctor. I supply him with contraband tobacco. Be at
the Quarantine Pier tomorrow at one o’clock. I’ll be waiting for you by the
Portugal. I won’t charge you anything. Just treat me to a nice meal in town
and we’ll call it even!’
   He was quiet for a few moments.
   ‘Someday,’ he said, leaning in close so I could hear him over the rumble
of a passing tram, ‘I’ll tell you all about myself. People say the worst things
about me. The fact is my life is like one of those serialised novels you read
in the magazines. I’ve got a secret life. Of course, fate has dealt me some
harsh blows. But I dare say no one’s more respectable than I. The fact is
I’ve just had rotten luck, and that’s why my plans have no room to
blossom.’
   Out of the dark night, cold blasts of air tore through an open window of
the unlit tram. At the time, the lights had been turned out in all the port
cities.
   ‘If I had my way,’ said Lipogon, ‘I’d sail the seven seas. What a life
that’d be. Like a painting by Aivazovsky!’3
   The next day I arrived at the Quarantine Pier at ten o’clock in the
morning instead of one in the afternoon. Alongside the breakwater a white
ocean liner with two huge red crosses on its sides was dissolving in the
dazzling, dry sunlight. On the stern I read an inscription in gold French
lettering: ‘Portugal-Marseille’.
   There was something unreal about the whiteness of the ship, its ethereal
masts, rigging and bridges, its shiny brass, the gem-like sharpness of its
portholes, and the sparkle of its decks, as if this ship had arrived from some
festive other world, as if it had been made from hardened light. This was a
passenger liner of the French company Messageries Maritimes. Before the
war it had plied between Marseilles, Madagascar, Syria and Arabia, and for
some reason had sailed into the Black Sea. There it was caught by the war
with Turkey, and so by agreement with the French government the Portugal
was handed over to us for use as a hospital ship. We painted it white. Young
nurses in grey summer dresses and sailors in white were walking about on
the decks of the Portugal. I didn’t want to be seen waiting, and so left to
stroll around the port until one o’clock.
   At precisely one that afternoon I returned to the ship. At the foot of the
gangway stood Lipogon chatting casually with a young naval doctor. The
doctor had sarcastic dark eyes and a red neck, as if the white collar of his
tunic were too tight. He gave me a brief handshake before turning once
more to Lipogon: ‘All right then, goodbye, skipper! Bring me some more
tobacco once I’m back from my trip.’
   ‘Aye aye, sir!’ Lipogon said with exaggerated enthusiasm, before
saluting and walking off.
   The doctor took me by the arm and led me to his cabin. He squeezed my
arm so tightly that you would have thought he feared I might slip on the
glassy-smooth decks, fall and, God forbid, break some shiny instrument or
shatter a glass door. I didn’t care for this at all, but I kept my mouth shut
and didn’t try to pull my arm away.
   ‘In short,’ the doctor said once we had reached his cabin, which smelled
of a mixture of fresh salty sea air and fine tobacco, ‘I need another orderly
for the dressing station. You’re a student? Excellent! And you brought your
documents?’
   ‘Yes.’
   ‘Let me see.’
   I handed him my documents. He took a quick look and gave them back.
   ‘Consider the matter settled,’ he said. ‘Come back the day after
tomorrow. We just have a few formalities to take care of, and after that
we’ll need you to remain on board. It’s likely we’ll be sailing soon.’
   I was dazed. I couldn’t believe that I’d soon be sailing on an ocean liner.
My childhood dreams had come true. Of course, I’d miss the train and my
comrades, but my desire to head out to sea trumped everything. The doctor
escorted me back to the top of the gangway. A little old man, as fidgety as a
monkey, was standing there in some sort of naval uniform that clearly
wasn’t Russian. Given all the gold braid on his sleeves, I assumed he must
be someone high up in the chain of command.
   ‘Our captain, Monsieur Bayard,’ the young doctor whispered in my ear.
   He bowed to the captain and said in French: ‘Monsieur le Capitaine, may
I present our new orderly. He is a student from Moscow.’
   I bowed.
   ‘My God, it’s simply incomprehensible!’ Monsieur Bayard exclaimed,
throwing both hands into the air. ‘Instead of getting on with their courses,
students here are busy spooning kasha into the mouths of Russian peasants.
Nobody in this confounded country does what they’re supposed to.
Nobody!’
   With his small but strong brown paws, he grabbed my shoulders, swung
me around and looked me straight in the eyes. ‘Oh . . . oh . . . oh, yes, yes
indeed,’ he said. ‘We’ve all been through this before. I know all about you.
Dreams, yes, dreams, of course! But no, no,’ he suddenly yelled, ‘you’ve
got it all wrong, my friend. Look, there’s the sea, out there!’
   With that he took off his gold-braided cap and pointed to his grey, closely
cropped head. ‘It’s all here in your head, it is, all those magical nights along
the equator, the sunsets in Bengal, the smell of cinnamon and all that other
nonsense. It’s all just right here! What can I say? You’re ill, young man, and
the fact is I don’t know a single medicine that can cure you. And so, I’m
very glad to welcome you aboard my ship.’
   He turned on his heels and trotted off to the captain’s bridge. The doctor
watched him go with an amused but respectful smile. ‘That’s our captain,’
he said. ‘A splendid man from Gascony. Well then, until the day after
tomorrow.’
   The following day I treated Lipogon to lunch at the Dardanelles
Restaurant on Stepovaya Street. In fact, it was less of a restaurant and more
like a fly-infested cafeteria. Romanin and Nikolashka Rudnev joined us.
Both of them were upset by my decision to leave the train and, strange as I
found it, neither of them envied me. On the contrary, they seemed to
disapprove of my action.
   Lunch at the Dardanelles ended in scandal. We were served mutton stew.
We ate it and then Lipogon immediately summoned our lazy waiter. ‘Fetch
the proprietor,’ he said.
   ‘Why?’
   ‘It’s not your place to ask.’
   The proprietor, a fat man with a greenish face and a sleepy expression,
reluctantly shuffled out of a back room. ‘What’s the problem?’ he asked in a
hoarse voice. ‘If the food’s not good enough, you’d be better off taking your
fancy ways over to the restaurant in the Hotel London. That’s not the kind
of place I’m running here.’
   ‘The problem is, Mr Kamenyuk,’ Lipogon said sinisterly, ‘that you’ve
been serving your customers tainted mutton, and so very likely sending
them off to heaven for their next meal.’
   ‘You think so?’ Kamenyuk asked ironically. ‘Well, well, tainted, you say?
I’ll have you know I serve only the highest-quality mutton.’
   ‘And I tell you it’s tainted!’
   ‘Then why did you eat all of it?’ Kamenyuk asked, the note of irony in
his voice now tinged with a hint of danger. ‘You’ve left nothing but the
bones. You even mopped the plates with your bread. Don’t take me for a
fool. I wasn’t born yesterday.’
   ‘Oh, really? So your mutton isn’t tainted after all?’ exclaimed Lipogon,
with an odd air of triumph. ‘Then I humbly request you bring us four more
servings of your lovely ragout.’
   Kamenyuk clearly did not care for Lipogon’s last words. ‘We’ve run out
of mutton,’ he said, blanching. ‘There’s no more! Understand? And I’m not
serving you another thing.’
   ‘In that case,’ Lipogon sighed, ‘you’ve left me no other choice than to
fetch the policeman, Mr Skulsky. It’s now up to the law to decide the
matter. And if there’s trouble, Mr Kamenyuk, don’t blame me.’
   Kamenyuk slammed his fist on the table. ‘Get out, now, before there’s
trouble! Just get out. I don’t want your money. I’m through with you.’ He
stared Lipogon straight in the face. ‘And may you choke on that money of
yours, you scum!’
   We were so shocked by this unexpected turn of events that none of us
could get a word out. I did manage to pull out some money and lay it on the
table, but I doubt all of it found its way into Kamenyuk’s pocket, for he
angrily flung the money at Lipogon, who picked it up and then, with a
dramatic show of disdain, flung it back at Kamenyuk. The number of
banknotes that Lipogon threw at Kamenyuk, I did manage to notice, was
considerably fewer than what Kamenyuk had thrown at Lipogon.
   Shaking with anger, I asked Lipogon once we were out on the street:
‘Why did you make that ridiculous scene?’
   ‘Because you’re students,’ said Lipogon, ‘and you’ve got empty pockets.
And that Kamenyuk is getting rich off tainted meat.’
   ‘But that mutton wasn’t tainted!’
   ‘Not today, but tomorrow for certain,’ Lipogon said unruffled. ‘You saw
how he squirmed when I asked for a second helping. That’s because that
son of a bitch wasn’t sure it was still good. If he’d given us that second
helping, and it really was tainted, then I’d have material proof for the
police. Better for him to get rid of us than take the risk.’
   We discussed the incident for a long time back at the train. In the evening
we went to the country house so I could say my goodbyes to the doctors and
nurses. Everyone there was stunned by my decision. Some were envious,
others puzzled. Lëlya alone said nothing, biting her lips and refusing to look
at me. We were sitting out on the dark terrace. Down below, the surf
murmured softly. Lëlya grabbed my arm. ‘Come with me!’ she said.
   We walked out into a darkened garden and then began to make our way
down to the sea. Lëlya was still silent, but held me tightly by the arm, the
way one holds a naughty boy being led to his punishment. Once we’d
reached the water, Lëlya finally stopped. She was breathing heavily.
   ‘Dreamer!’ she said. ‘You’ve got your head in the clouds! You’re no
better than some foolish schoolboy! First thing tomorrow you’re marching
straight down to that ridiculous steamer and telling them you’ve changed
your mind. Do you hear me?’
   ‘Why?’
   ‘Why? Oh my God! Do you really not get it? Because that’s no way to
treat your friends, that’s why. Because it’s just not what people do! Of
course, it’s much nicer to twiddle your thumbs in that floating drawing
room of a hospital with its frilly curtains and scented dolls for nurses than it
is to work in the mud and blood of a beaten-up old goods wagon. Even
Romanin and Rudnev, and all the rest of your friends, feel uncomfortable
about your decision. Don’t pretend you didn’t notice! Of course, no one
would say that to your face. Except for me, that is. Because I care . . .
Because I want to think well of you . . . And don’t ask me anything that you
already know perfectly well yourself.’
   ‘I didn’t ask you anything.’
   ‘Fine! Well, go on, I’m waiting.’
   A storm raged inside me. In some way, Lëlya was right, of course. But
how could I give up this incredible opportunity to go to sea, how could I
give up a dream I had waited so long for, ever since I was a young child?
   ‘No,’ I told her. ‘I can’t turn this down. It’s not at all what you think.
You’d be better off not saying anything when you’re so angry.’
   ‘Very well then, farewell!’ Lëlya blurted, before turning and walking off
into the darkness along the white edge of the surf.
   I called to her. She didn’t answer. I followed her. She stopped and said in
a cold, angry voice: ‘Don’t follow me. You’re being ridiculous! Goodbye.
My regards to your new friend . . . what’s his name . . . Lipogon.’
   She laughed. I waited. I heard her walk on, then stop, throw a few small
stones into the sea and start singing, clearly to make fun of me:

       If you knew how I mourn,
       My heart, ripe with trust and nurture,
       You’d come, and united we’d scorn
       My fate savaged by strange torture.

  I turned round, climbed the bank and, without stopping at the house,
walked back home into Odessa. It was an unusually dark night. The gardens
rustled with the sound of the wind. Twice I was stopped by patrols and
asked to present my papers. I kept playing over in my mind everything that
had happened, hour by hour, until suddenly I realised with horror that I
myself wasn’t sure whether or not I was doing the right thing. I simply did
not know!
   ‘What is this?’ I asked myself. ‘A want of moral decency? An illness?
Simply a refusal to look matters squarely in the face? Am I really so flighty
as that?’
   One moment I thought Lëlya was perfectly right. The next just the
opposite, that everything she had said was nothing more than hypocrisy and
pretence. But why did Romanin and Rudnev refuse to look me in the eye?
What was bothering them? Had they written me off as worthless? Why?
And whoever came up with the notion that serving on a hospital ship was
some sort of pleasure cruise? No, I would not pass up this opportunity, I
was not going to give in. To hell with them! Naturally, I lost my way and
didn’t get back to the train until after everyone had fallen asleep. This was
fine by me.
   The following morning, I went down to the Quarantine Pier, but the
Portugal was gone, replaced by a rusty coal barge. A man on the barge
cleaning sea roach told me that the Portugal had sailed the night before for
Trebizond.
   ‘Why?’ I asked, confused. ‘She wasn’t supposed to leave for a few days.’
   ‘It happens,’ said the man with the fish casually. ‘They got their orders.
Urgent, it was. There’s a war on, my friend. But she’ll be back, don’t you
worry.’
   I was ashamed to have to go back to my carriage and my friends, but I
had no choice.
   ‘So what are you going to do now?’ Romanin asked in an offhand way.
   ‘Wait for the Portugal to return.’
   ‘Okay then, go on and wait. It’s none of my business, of course.’
   I couldn’t bear staying in the carriage any longer, so I took the tram to
Lustdorf. I spent the entire day on the beach in Lustdorf, a boring German
colony. I didn’t eat a thing all day until evening when I bought myself a
dozen apricots. I decided to take the last tram of the day back to Odessa, but
it never came and so I walked. It was about twenty kilometres. Again, it
was a dark, windy night. Again, the trees rustled in the gardens along the
road and acacia seeds, bursting from their pods, peppered my face. I felt all
alone in the world. How I wished to see Mama again, to have her ruffle my
hair and say, ‘Oh, Kostik, you really are incorrigible!’
   I sat down to rest next to the wrought-iron gates of a dacha. There was a
stone wall cut with a deep recess for statues. The recess was empty, and so I
crawled in, hugged my knees to my chest and sat there for a long time.
Finally, I fell asleep. It must have been the presence of a schoolboy,
standing with his bike and staring at me, a smile on his face, that woke me
up.
   ‘Good morning!’ he said. ‘You look just like Antokolsky’s statue of
Mephistopheles.’4
   ‘There’s no such statue!’ I snapped at him, even though I knew quite well
there was. I slid down out of the niche and headed for town. The road was
bordered by stone walls. Looking at them, I felt as though I’d seen them
before. Could this be Maly Fontan? Off in the distance I could see a metal
lantern hanging over the gate by the house where the doctor and nurses
lived. I had completely forgotten that the road to Lustdorf passed by this
part of town.
   I went up to the gate, opened it and looked into the garden, which ran
down to the white, calm sea. It was a cloudy, windless morning. A few
drops of rain fell on my face and on the pathway, its pebbles white with
dried sea salt. Dark wet spots formed where the rain fell, and then dried as I
watched.
   They must all still be asleep, I thought. I wished to see Lëlya. My
feelings of loneliness from the night before returned. Did they know that the
Portugal had sailed without me? Probably not. None of the orderlies had
any plans yesterday to visit the house. I walked cautiously into the garden.
Behind a tall trimmed box hedge I spied the familiar green bench. I sat
down. No one could see me from either the terrace or the garden, which
was fine with me. I would just rest a bit and then leave without being
noticed. A few more drops of rain fell on my face. The gulls screamed over
the sea. I raised my head. Someone was hurrying from the house to the gate.
I peeped through a gap in the hedge and saw Lëlya.
   She was wearing a raincoat but no hat, and her face was paler than I had
ever seen before. She was walking fast, almost running. I stood up, parted
the branches of the hedge and stepped through to meet her. Catching sight
of me she screamed, fell to her knees and then, leaning on one arm, slowly
let herself sink onto the grey gravel. Her eyes were closed. I ran to her and
tried to lift her by the shoulders, but she didn’t move. She moaned quietly
and in a faint voice said: ‘Oh God, he’s alive! Oh, dear God!’
   ‘I missed the Portugal,’ I said, searching for words, not at all certain
what to say to calm her.
   ‘Help me,’ she said, lifting her tear-stained face. ‘Give me your hand.’
She got up with difficulty. ‘So, do you really not know?’
   ‘No,’ I replied, utterly at a loss.
   ‘Let’s go somewhere else, anywhere but here.’
   We went into the neglected garden of an empty house next door. There
Lëlya wearily sank onto a bench. ‘Oh, my God,’ she said, looking at me,
her eyes full of tears. ‘You fool, you fool you! Here, read this!’
   She pulled a sheet of paper out of her coat pocket. It was a special
bulletin from the Odessa News. I unfolded the sheet and saw the black
headline: ‘Latest German Atrocity. Hospital Ship Portugal Torpedoed By
German Submarine On Its Way To Sevastopol. No Survivors.’5 I tossed the
paper aside and put my arms around Lëlya. She was sobbing like a little
child – without shame or embarrassment – and tears of relief poured down
her face.
   ‘Good Lord!’ she said through her tears. ‘What am I crying for? What
nonsense. Please don’t think I’ve gone and fallen in love with you. I was
just scared, that’s all.’
   ‘Yes, of course, I don’t think anything of the sort,’ I answered, stroking
her wet hair.
   ‘Honestly?’ she looked up and smiled at me. ‘Hand me my bag, please. I
have a handkerchief. I was rushing into town for more news . . . maybe
there are some survivors.’


1From Nadson’s ‘By the Sea’ (1885). Several of his works were set to
music by Sergei Rachmaninoff and César Cui.
2   Vera Kholodnaya (1893–1919), silent film star.
3 Ivan Aivazovsky (1817–1900), Russian-Armenian painter especially
known for his romantic seascapes.
4Mark Antokolsky (1843–1902), Jewish-Lithuanian sculptor who created
many works of famous historical figures.
5The Portugal was sunk on 30 March 1916 by a German submarine. Of the
273 people on board, more than 100 did, in fact, survive.

                          OceanofPDF.com
54
Over Bombed-Out Roads



More than a month before our trip to Odessa, Romanin and I had put in a
request to Moscow for a transfer from the train to a field hospital unit. We
wanted to be closer to the war.
   Romanin had his own particular reason for wanting the transfer. He told
me in secret that he had been writing stories about the war for a radical
newspaper in Vyatka and the train was not providing him with enough
material. He showed me a few of his published stories. I liked them for their
simple and precise language. Romanin talked me into writing two or three
stories for this newspaper. I wrote only one. I called it ‘Blue Overcoats’,
and it was published. It described how the entire garrison of several
thousand Austrian soldiers at the fortress of Pshemysl had been taken
prisoner. We had seen these prisoners in Brest. There was one incident,
however, one that had struck not only me but all of us orderlies as strange,
that I had not been able to write about.
   The prisoners were being led through Brest. A sluggish stream of dingy
blue overcoats, thousands of Austrian soldiers and officers shuffled along
the city streets in their broken boots. At times the flow came to a halt, and
the men, unshaven and dejected, stared at the ground and waited. Then they
were ordered to march on, bent under the heavy weight of their unknown
destiny. All of a sudden, Hugo Lyakhman grabbed me by the arm. ‘Look!’
he yelled. ‘Over there! Look at that Austrian soldier!’ I looked and felt a
shiver run down my spine. Walking towards me, in tired yet steady steps
and wearing an Austrian uniform, was my very self. I had heard much about
doubles but had never actually encountered one. And now here I was face
to face with my double. We were each other’s duplicates in every last detail,
down to the small birthmark on our right temples.
   ‘What the devil!’ said Romanin. ‘That’s downright terrifying.’
   What happened next was equally strange. One of the guards looked at
me, then at the Austrian, ran up to him, tugged on his sleeve and pointed me
out. The prisoner looked, appeared to stumble and then stopped dead. So
did the rest of the Austrians. We stared into each other’s eyes for what could
not have been more than a minute, but what seemed to me like an entire
hour. An excited murmur ran through the crowd of prisoners. I detected a
look of surprise in the Austrian’s dark eyes, which in an instant was
replaced by fear. He quickly recovered himself, and, raising a pale hand, he
waved at me. There was a shy smile on his sad face.
   ‘March!’ the guard bellowed at last.
   The blue overcoats swayed and moved on. The Austrian turned round to
wave at me several times as he walked. I waved back. So we met and
parted, never to see each other again.
   There was a lot of talk about this strange incident back on the train.
Everyone agreed this Austrian soldier must have been a Ukrainian. And
since I was part Ukrainian, our striking similarity was easily explained.

                                      •

While still in Odessa, a few days after the sinking of the Portugal, Romanin
and I received a telegram from Moscow informing us that we were both
being transferred to the same field hospital unit and were ordered to leave
for Moscow immediately, and from there to our assigned unit. After the
recent incident with the Portugal, I had been only too glad to stay on the
train and was not at all pleased by this new assignment. But there was no
getting out of it. I did, however, draw some comfort from the fact that I’d
still be working alongside Romanin.
   Our friends gave us a noisy send-off at Odessa station. As a joke,
someone hired a small Jewish orchestra, naturally with the help of Lipogon.
The musicians, old Jews in dusty frock coats who had seen everything in
their lives, stood calmly on the platform, fiddling away at the maxixe and
the cakewalk, and then, after the third whistle, struck up the old military
march ‘Longing for the Homeland’. The hundreds of passengers, as well as
the hundreds of family and friends who had come to see them off, cheered
along with our lively farewell.
   At the last moment, Lëlya hugged me tightly, kissed me, and made me
promise to write to her. She whispered in my ear that she too wanted to
transfer to a field unit or hospital and so we would probably see each other
again somewhere in Poland.
   The train started. Lipogon lifted his cap high off his head and held it
there until our train disappeared around a bend. The violins sobbed,
repeating their familiar tune over and over again. I stuck my head out of the
window and watched Lëlya waving her white scarf until she faded from
view. And, as always when one phase of my life had ended and another was
about to begin, longing filled my heart. Longing, and regret, for the past,
and for the friends I was leaving behind.
   I lay down on the upper berth and, staring at the ceiling, recalled every
single day of this long and troubled year. I knew only one thing for certain:
that I had to live as I had this past year – always seeking out new people
and places. This was the way to live if I wanted to become a writer.
   Nothing had changed in Moscow – the flat permeated with kitchen smells
that clung to the very walls, Galya worrying endlessly about nothing, and
Mama silent and tight-lipped. I was given a simple uniform and an overcoat
with strange silver shoulder straps and a single star, and went off to report
to the head of the field hospital units, a man by the name of Chemodanov.
Romanin had already left and written me a note to say that Chemodanov
was a decent man, a connoisseur of music and the author of many articles
on musical matters. I recalled what Captain Bayard had said about how no
one in this incomprehensible country did the job they should be doing. Now
it occurred to me that the captain had a rather odd understanding of doing
what one should. At the moment, given we were at war, everyone should be
defending Russia. That I knew for certain.
   Chemodanov, a tall, dark-haired and exceptionally polite man in a field
jacket, greeted me kindly but with a trace of distrust. ‘I’m afraid you’ll find
it difficult in the unit,’ he said.
   ‘Why?’
   ‘You seem to me rather shy, and in these circumstances, that’s a liability.’
   There was nothing I could say to that.
   The unit was somewhere near Lublin. I had to go to Brest to find out
where exactly. And so I left. I travelled in a first-class carriage crowded
with officers. I was ill at ease in my uniform with its shoulder straps and
their little star and its shiny sword hilt. A captain, chain-smoking in the seat
next to me, noticed my discomfort and asked me just who and what I was,
and then he gave me some practical advice: ‘My son,’ he said, ‘salute as
often as you can and remember to repeat just two things: “May I?” to your
superiors and “Certainly” to your subordinates. That will spare you a lot of
trouble.’
   It turned out this gruff captain was wrong. The next day I went to the
dining car for dinner. All the tables were full. The only empty seat was at a
small table opposite a fat, grey-whiskered general. I approached, bowed
slightly, and said: ‘May I?’
   The general was munching on a piece of roast beef. He mumbled some
kind of answer. His mouth was stuffed with meat, and so I had not been
able to understand just what he had said. I thought I had heard him say,
‘Certainly.’
   I sat down. The general, finally finishing with his piece of beef, stared at
me for a long time, his bulging eyes filling with rage. Finally, he said:
‘What’s with this fancy dress, young man? What sort of uniform is that?’
   ‘This is what they gave me, Your Excellency.’
   ‘Who, who gave it to you?’ the general shouted.
   The dining car suddenly fell silent.
   ‘The Union of Cities, Your Excellency.’
   ‘Holy Mother of God!’ the general thundered. ‘I have the honour of
being a member of the Supreme Commander’s General Staff, but I never
could have imagined such a thing possible! Anarchy in the Russian army!
Anarchy, debauchery, utter breakdown!’
   He got up, snorting loudly, and left the dining car. Only then did I notice
his aiguillettes and the imperial cypher on his epaulettes.
   Dozens of officers were now looking at me and laughing.
   ‘Bad luck!’ said a tall cavalry officer at the table next to me. ‘Do you
know who that was?’
   ‘No.’
   ‘General Yanushkevich, on the staff of Supreme Commander Grand
Duke Nikolai Nikolaevich. His right-hand man. You’d best go back to your
compartment and don’t show your face until we reach Brest. The next time
might be your last.’

                              OceanofPDF.com
55
The Little Knight



In Brest I made my way to the so-called Medical Units Base – a small
house overgrown with wild vines. The base was empty except for one
lonely old nurse who was waiting for Gronsky, the head of the units. It
turned out I had to wait for Gronsky as well since he was the only one who
knew where my unit was.
    The nurse was a Pole and spoke with an accent. ‘He’s such a flighty man,
Pan Gronsky,’ she sighed. ‘He flies in, makes a load of noise, kisses our
hands and then flies off again. You never even have a chance to get a word
in. Oh, Mother of God! I’m just wasting away here for no good reason
thanks to that featherbrain.’
    I had already heard about Gronsky from Chemodanov. An actor with the
Warsaw Comedy Theatre, Gronsky was a gallant and brave officer with
many good qualities, but frivolous in the extreme. In light of this, and his
diminutive stature, he was known as the ‘Little Knight’.
    ‘You’ll see for yourself,’ said Chemodanov. ‘It’s like he sprang from the
pages of a Sienkiewicz novel.’
    I washed after my journey, drank some coffee with Pani Jadwiga, the old
nurse, and lay down on a camp bed. I didn’t feel like sleeping. I found a
tattered copy of Sarcey’s The Siege of Paris1 on the windowsill and started
to read. The wind rustled the vine leaves outside the window. Suddenly, a
car, its engine backfiring wildly, drove up to the house. Someone jumped
out, raced up the stairs, spurs clanking, and threw open the door. I saw a
little man in uniform with joyful eyes, an enormous nose worthy of Cyrano
de Bergerac and a bushy brown moustache.
    ‘My child!’ he cried in a high-pitched voice and threw himself onto the
bed.
    I just barely had time to get out of the way.
    ‘My child! I’m overjoyed! We’ve been waiting for you like manna from
heaven. Romanin has been pining.’
    Gronsky embraced me firmly and kissed me three times. There was the
faint smell of violets on his moustache.
    ‘Wait!’ he cried, then raced to the window, stuck out his head and called
down: ‘Pani Jadwiga! Hello! I’ve got good news. I’ve finally put together
the perfect unit for you. Nothing but choirboys, all of them. What?! Would I
lie to you?’ Gronsky raised his right hand to the sky: ‘Before Our Lord God
and His Most Holy Son Jesus, I do swear that I shall rush you there
tomorrow in this rickety Ford! All three of us will go.’
    Pulling his head back in, he shouted: ‘Artemenko, come here!’
    An orderly attached to the base rushed into the room, his boots making a
thundering noise.
    ‘Let me look at your open, honest face,’ said Gronsky.
    Ashamed, Artemenko tried to avoid Gronsky’s stare.
    ‘Where are the five tins of condensed milk? The ones that were under my
bed?’
    ‘I have no idea!’ snapped Artemenko.
    ‘You son of a bitch!’ said Gronsky. ‘Don’t let it happen again. Or else
you’ll be court-martialled, which will be followed by a penal battalion, a
sobbing wife and children ruined for life. Now get out of my sight!’
    Artemenko scrambled to the door.
    ‘Stop!’ Gronsky roared. ‘Bring me the box from the car. And don’t break
it, you clumsy oaf !’
    Artemenko sprang from the room.
    ‘My child, my son!’ said Gronsky, taking me by the shoulders, giving me
a good shake and then peering into my eyes. ‘If only you knew how sorry I
am for every single young man who ends up in this lunatic asylum, this
bedlam, this inferno, this nest of lice, this damned meat grinder, this
pandemonium we call war. But you can count on me. I’ll see you won’t
come to any harm.’
    Artemenko dragged a plywood box into the room. Gronsky kicked the lid
with the tip of his polished boot. The lid flew off, but so did the sole of his
boot.
    ‘Please do help yourself !’ said a polite yet saddened Gronsky, pointing at
the box. There, tightly packed underneath some wax paper, lay stacks of
chocolate bars.
   Gronsky sat down on the bed, took off his boot and looked at it for a long
time, a frown on his face. ‘Incredible!’ he said, shaking his head in
disbelief. ‘That’s the third time in week I’ve torn the sole off. It must be
some kind of portent! Artemenko! Where’re you hiding?’
   ‘Here, sir!’ snapped Artemenko, who was standing right next to him.
   ‘Take my boot to that genius of a cobbler Yakob Kur, the pock-marked
scoundrel. Tell him it had better be ready in an hour. Or else I’ll hop over
there myself in one boot and shred his rotten hovel with my sword and
make him dance to the tambourine.’
   Artemenko snatched the boot and dashed off.
   ‘Well?’ asked Gronsky, ‘has Pani Jadwiga pecked a hole in your head
yet? The old bird. May the Good Lord give her a hundred kicks in the
backside! What am I supposed to do with her? One coarse word and she
rolls her eyes and practically faints. Such a prissy little thing they’ve sent
me. Let’s have some tea with brandy. What do you say? And tonight we’ll
go to the concert at the officers’ mess. We’re off tomorrow at dawn. That’s
assuming, of course, that my driver, His Excellency Pan Zvonkovoi, has
fixed the engine.’
   ‘What’s wrong with it?’
   ‘It got shot up. At the railway crossing near Lyubartov. No idea where the
bullets came from. Ha ha! You’re reading Sarcey? I prefer Zola’s
L’Assommoir. I like analytical writers. Balzac, for example. But I also love
poetry.’ Gronsky pulled a small book from the pocket of his coat, waved it
in the air and announced with true conviction: ‘Yevgeny Onegin! I’m never
without it! Never! Worlds may crumble, but the glory of these lines shall
live forever!’
   Pan Gronsky was making my head spin. He looked at me carefully. I
could see he was concerned.
   ‘My son! Lie down and take a little nap before the concert. I’ll wake you
up.’
   I was happy to lie down. Gronsky ran off downstairs. I could hear him
washing himself over the basin, snorting and whistling ‘La Marseillaise’.
Then he said something, apparently to Artemenko. ‘So tell me, do you
know what it means to be “taken out behind the woodshed”? No? Well,
then, I can certainly show you. It’s most interesting.’
   Pani Jadwiga groaned. ‘Mother of God.’
   Gronsky continued: ‘I may be just a worm, but nonetheless I’m going to
bust that adjutant’s face. They can shoot me for all I care. It makes no
difference to me!’
   At this point I fell asleep. I was awakened by a loud twang as if a taut
cable had been snapped in the room. The sun had gone down, and I could
see a dark green sky through the open window. I lay there and listened. Pani
Jadwiga was praying loudly, and then again the same loud twang of a
snapping cable. A reddish light flickered in the sky, and from somewhere
off in the twilight came the faint rumble of engines.
   ‘Get up!’ shouted Gronsky. ‘There’s a zeppelin over Brest!’
   I jumped out of bed and ran to the balcony. Gronsky and Artemenko
were there already, looking up at the sky.
   ‘Right there!’ said Gronsky, pointing. ‘Don’t you see it? Just a touch to
the left of the Great Bear.’
   Staring up, I saw a long dark shadow gliding swiftly across the sky. From
nearby came the crackle of sporadic rifle fire. Shrapnel exploded in yellow
flames over the house.
   ‘Not bad!’ said Gronsky. ‘If it goes on like this, we’ll get a bullet in the
head from one of our own soldiers. The German has dropped his two bombs
and is leaving. The show’s over. Let’s go. Our tea is ready.’
   After tea Gronsky took me to the officers’ mess. It was a long wooden
barn. The windows opened onto a garden and fresh air was pouring in. I
was dead tired. Half asleep, I heard a rumbling bass voice: ‘At twelve
o’clock midnight, the drummer arises from the grave . . .’2
   I opened my eyes. A tall, clean-shaven officer with hair parted in the
centre was singing.
   ‘He’s a famous singer,’ said Gronsky, but I had by then fallen back to
sleep and never did remember his name. I slept through the entire concert.
   We left in the morning. His Excellency Pan Zvonkovoi turned out to be a
snub-nosed but kind metalworker from Penza. Listening to Gronsky’s
stories, he would just grin and shake his head in amazement, saying ‘Well,
well!’
   I remember great mounds of sand, bombed-out roads and villagers
frightened to within an inch of their lives. Crawling towards us, their
wheels ploughing through deep sand, were carts loaded with refugees. We
left Pani Jadwiga in one of the villages. It was towards evening when we
finally reached the village of Vyshnitsa, where Romanin’s unit was based.
The local commander’s black and yellow flag hung over a house made of
cheap planks. The dust kicked up into the air by the carts and animals hung
like a dry fog before slowly settling onto the ground.
   Old Jews, the armbands of the provisional army police on their sleeves,
ran from house to house rounding up the villagers to go and dig trenches
out beyond the village fence. The faint rumbling of an artillery duel could
be heard in the distance.
   It was a muggy, disturbing and chaotic night. Dozens of fires burned in
the village square. Around the fires, next to their unharnessed wagons,
refugees – Polish peasants – sat or lay about next to each other in rows.
Exhausted mothers, their heads bare, cradled their babies, who were by now
numb with hunger and turning blue. Dogs barked. Coachmen cursed as they
tried to find a way through this human confusion. They lashed the people
with their whips, drove their wheels over the peasants’ mounds of clothing
and household goods; embroidered towels, kerchiefs and shirts dragged
along behind the wagons. Women, weeping, grabbed their possessions from
under the wheels and took them to the fires. But their things were already
torn, smeared with pitch and covered with dirt. Old Jewish women in red
wigs came out of their hovels dragging the accumulated junk of a lifetime –
quilts, crockery, old sewing machines, copper basins green with age –
which they had bundled up in bedsheets and blankets. I looked about but
there wasn’t a single wagon or cart left to take them away.
   Romanin’s unit was billeted at an old inn on the edge of the village. Four
enormous cast-iron kettles placed upon solid stands simmered on the
trampled ground outside. Soldiers bustled around the kettles. Romanin was
standing there shouting hoarsely at an officer whose hair was grey with
dust. ‘Go to hell!’ Romanin yelled. He noticed Gronsky and me, waved,
and then turned back to the officer. ‘One of your cows drops dead every
half-hour. You’re just throwing their carcasses on the roads. So why are you
being so stingy?’
   ‘I need a written statement,’ the officer complained. ‘For every dead cow
we write out a statement. I’m not about to risk a court martial because of
you.’
   ‘All right, damn you, let’s go and write up a statement!’ said Romanin,
taking the officer by the arm and leading him into the inn. He turned around
and smiled at me: ‘I’ll be right there. I just have to finish up this ridiculous
business with this cattle merchant.’
   We followed him into the inn. It was empty and reeked of stale smoke.
Upon seeing us, the cockroaches began scattering along the walls.
   ‘Have a smoke,’ Gronsky said, ‘in a minute you’ll be getting down to
work. You can see what’s going on here. I’m going to give this commander
of cows a good talking to.’
   I sat down on a rickety bench and lit a cigarette. I could hear the women
outside weeping and pleading with the soldiers for something. Cows
bellowed, as if in pain, and the sound of the distant gunfire intensified. With
every explosion sand trickled from a crack in the ceiling onto a hunk of
black bread on the table. I pushed the bread out of the way. Three voices
were now arguing on the other side of a partition. Romanin roared, the
officer made an effort to fight back, and Gronsky shouted in an exasperated
sing-song tenor.
   ‘Give me two cows and you’ll have your statement,’ screamed Romanin.
‘Basta! I’ve got nothing to feed these people. Peo-ple, human beings, get
it?! Children are dying like flies, and you’re worried about a scrap of paper.
You ought to be ashamed of yourself, Captain!’
   All was quiet behind the partition. Out came Romanin. ‘Wonderful,’ he
said in a hoarse voice and then kissed me on the cheeks. ‘Right on time. I
just managed to prevail over that fool. I got two cows from him. We need to
slaughter one straight away, cut up the carcass and boil it in the kettles. Go
and get some of the other orderlies to help. We don’t have time to let the
flesh hang. The refugees haven’t eaten for two days.’
   Romanin raised the greasy window curtain and looked out. ‘Just look at
that!’ he said. ‘I don’t think I’ve slept in five days, but that’s nothing. Get to
work. We’ll find some time to talk later.’
   Gronsky had already told me on the way that since the Poles had been
forced to pack up and flee, some of the field medical units, including ours,
would be ordered to feed and care for the refugees. Nonetheless, I still had
no idea what this meant.
   ‘Don’t ask anyone about what needs to be done,’ Romanin told me. ‘Just
do what you think’s right. And to hell with your tact and politeness! They’ll
get us nowhere and will cost dozens of lives.’
   Romanin gave me two orderlies. We slaughtered the cow by the light of a
bonfire in the inn’s yard. Its dry horns lay sticking out of the ground. The
blood oozed and puddled around us. There was too much of it for the dusty
earth to absorb. The three of us hacked the carcass into large pieces. I had
rolled up the sleeves of my new soldier’s tunic, but still they were drenched
with blood. We cut up the meat and hung it on a fence to let it dry a little.
The clouds of dust grew thicker and thicker. The light from the bonfires
became dim orange blurs. Then the old glass windows of the inn began to
jingle and the whole house shook and danced.
   Gronsky came out into the yard. ‘Farewell, my son,’ he said, and then
grabbed me by my bloodied sleeves and gave me a kiss. ‘I’m off to the
Third Unit. Things are bad there.’
   ‘What’s that rattling?’ I asked. ‘More carts?’
   ‘Those aren’t carts, that’s our artillery falling back,’ said Gronsky. ‘Well,
farewell! And good luck! Don’t hold up the food, my child, that’d be
dangerous.’
   He kissed me again, turned and left the yard. His head was bowed, as if
something were weighing on him.
   We dropped the meat into the kettles. Grey scum bubbled up to the
surface. We skimmed it off with large spoons and dumped it on the ground.
Starving, angry dogs licked the greasy dust. The soup, if I can call it that,
was ready in the early hours of the morning, and we began to pass it out to
the refugees. Hundreds of shaking hands stretched out to us, holding mugs,
old bowls, cups and saucers. The women, once they had received their
serving, tried to kiss our hands.
   The sound of crying, indistinguishable from laughter (and perhaps it
really was laughter, the laughter of all those famished people, overjoyed by
the smell of that hot beef), hung over the crowd. They drank the soup at
once, burning their lips and mumbling. In ten minutes the kettles were
empty. Romanin ordered us to fill them up again immediately.
   We slaughtered the second cow and hung the meat to dry. Again, the
fresh meat was soon covered by a black layer of dust and clouds of flies
appeared in the dark from out of nowhere. Again, children cried, and
drivers cursed in hoarse voices as they clattered past. And again, it rumbled
in the distance, but not as far off as the evening before, considerably closer
now.
   It was almost dawn when we fed the second group of refugees. Romanin
ordered us to hurry up and move on. Some of the refugees left, some
remained. The dawn was misty, the sky a dull red, and the air smelled of
something burning. Columns of black smoke rose along the horizon. The
orderlies said the crops had been set on fire. A Cossack patrol galloped into
the village and stopped in the square near the synagogue. They ran in and
out of two or three houses and then galloped off. Smoke began pouring
from the houses. Soon flames leapt skyward from the roofs and people
screamed. A shower of sparks fell on the sleeping children. The refugees’
rags began to smoulder. The women grabbed their children and, leaving
everything, rushed to the fields. The menfolk followed them.
   We made our way out of the village through the smoke and fire. Our
horses snorted and shied at the chaos.
   ‘Head back towards Pishchats and Terespol,’ said Romanin. ‘I’ll go on
ahead and secure billets. Follow the ambulances and stick to the back roads.
The main roads are all jammed. If you don’t find me in Pishchats, go
straight on to Terespol. Okay then, so long!’
   We kissed each other goodbye, and Romanin said, ‘This is no Portugal.’
He patted me on the shoulder, then grabbed the pommel, hopped on one
foot, threw his leg over his horse before landing heavily in the saddle, and
galloped off along the side of the road.
   We travelled all day along the back roads. I often had to check our maps.
Fires were burning all around us, and we were enveloped in smoke that
swirled and billowed as it drifted to the east. It seemed to me that the only
peaceful sound I heard the whole day was the rustling of the willows over a
shallow stream where we had stopped to water the horses. We passed the
refugees. Then we were passed by a string of carts and artillery. The name
‘Mackensen’ was heard spoken more and more often. The German army
under this field marshal was attacking not far behind us.
   Twice we stopped to bury dead bodies abandoned by the roadside. One of
them was a child. He was lying on a checked kerchief that his mother had
apparently taken off her head. Someone had torn up some winter cress by
the roots and placed it upon the child’s breast. The other one was a young
peasant woman. Her light- coloured eyes were still open, and she looked up
peacefully into the sky where a yellow sun shone through the smoke. A bee,
entangled in the woman’s hair, buzzed angrily. It must have been there a
long time, unable to find its way out.
   After we had travelled a good distance from the fresh graves, a quiet,
lanky orderly named Spolokh said to me: ‘That woman we buried, sir, I
think it was that baby’s mother.’
   ‘Why?’
    ‘She wasn’t wearing a kerchief. It was with the baby. So it seems to me
that must have been the mother.’
    ‘War . . . she’s a mother to some, and the devil to others,’ said
Gladyshchev, a thickset orderly, unexpectedly.
    I had been riding all day and was tired. My teeth were gritty with sand. I
thought of nothing, nothing except for one thing that I couldn’t forget,
namely that I had just buried two people and I didn’t even know their
names. I kept recalling the faint, pale down on the woman’s arms and the
baby’s smooth, round forehead.
    Whose fault was it that death had chosen them – that it had come to their
little village, where the periwinkles were still in blossom and where,
perhaps, the smell of warm bread still lingered in the peasant huts, to drive
them from their homes, hurrying and in tears, and to finish them off in a
strange land, in thick sand, on a highway, where the metal-rimmed wheels
of carts creaked by just inches from their eternally resting faces?
    ‘Sir!’ Spolokh said.
    ‘What is it?’
    ‘You should forget about it, that’s the best thing. Listen to me, take my
advice. I’ve had a year of this war.’
    ‘How’d you know I was thinking about it?’
    ‘It’s obvious. Your face gives it away.’
    It was hard to believe that only yesterday I had still been in peaceful
Brest, had drunk coffee at that little table with the old nurse, listened to
talkative Gronsky, slept in a soft bed and breathed the fresh night air.
    We arrived in Pishchats at dusk – the sand had held us up. Romanin
wasn’t there. Mountains of old household wares and torn books littered the
streets. I picked up a few of the books, looked at them and then threw them
back. They were written in incomprehensible ancient Hebrew.
    The village was deserted. Only some cats were left, crouching and then
leaping from door to door. We stopped to rest in what had once been a
barber’s shop. There was a sign hanging over the glass door and its jingling
bell. It depicted a rosy-cheeked dandy with a black moustache, wrapped in
a snow-white towel and seated in a chair, his legs in high-heeled boots
stretched out in front of him. One half of his face was lathered. All by itself,
without the aid of a human hand, an enormous razor hung threateningly in
the air inches from this dandy’s lathered cheek. The dandy smiled happily.
‘Viennese Barber Shop. Isaak Moses and Grandson’ read the sign.
   Inside, the floorboards were loose. The shop’s only mirror, cracked and
splattered with dried soap bubbles, swayed with every step we took. There
was the faint smell of eau-de-Cologne. On a small, three-legged bamboo
table lay some dirty, tattered copies of Little Fire, World Panorama and
Argus. Dazed flies buzzed against the windows. We made ourselves some
tea and gruel. I wasn’t feeling sleepy. I felt like sitting in the barber’s chair,
leaning back onto its worn velvet headrest, shutting my eyes and thinking.
Of what? Of the endless murmur of the sea and the noise of the cicadas in
the dry mountains. Of large yellow leaves drifting down from the plane
trees on an autumn evening in Alushta. Of a happy girl rushing to meet me.
Of poetry. And God knows what else, all manner of things equally distant
from the war and equally vague.
   But we had to move on. Again the stench of horse sweat, the shouting,
the creaking wheels, the hard saddle, and then the sand, ever more sand.
Only now, instead of tall plumes of billowing smoke behind us, we could
see the crimson glow of fires and, off to one side, the brilliant glitter of
stars. Yet the same metal growl of the guns continued to roll over the earth
– the barren thunder of war, the voice of Krupp’s guns, made for no other
purpose than to rip human bodies to pieces.
   Again I began to doze, and I thought I saw shooting stars streaking across
the dark sky, as if heaven had sent its scouts to earth to discover what the
heirs of those great Germans Leibniz, Humboldt and Herschel were up to.
That afternoon we arrived, at last, in Terespol.


1Reflections on the Siege of Paris during the Franco–Prussian War (1871),
by Francisque Sarcey (1827–99).
2 Opening lines of ‘The Nighttime Review’ (1836) by Vasily Zhukovsky
(1783–1852).

                               OceanofPDF.com
56
Two Thousand Volumes



I found Romanin in the home of the village priest. The dark wooden house
was set back in a garden, largely hidden behind thick clumps of nettles and
celandine. Here and there a few crimson hollyhocks poked out among the
weeds. The priest had not left Terespol with the refugees. He came out onto
the porch along with Romanin to greet me. He was thin and tall and had
lively eyes. His boots, turned a reddish brown from wear, showed beneath
his old cassock. The priest blessed me, according to the custom of the
times, and said in Russian: ‘My house is open to everyone. Just like the
house of God. Come in, my son. Make yourself at home.’ He had a high-
pitched childlike voice.
    We went in. The windowpanes rattled as we walked. The priest opened
the door of a gloomy, low-ceilinged room. The walls were lined with
wooden shelves holding hundreds of books.
    ‘I don’t want to see the Germans!’ said the priest all of sudden, stopping
in the doorway. He raised his large hands over his head, as if he were
warding off an apparition. ‘May the Virgin Mary save me from them! I
don’t want to lay my eyes on a single Prussian. Cursed be the vile night he
was conceived on some filthy mattress under a portrait of Chancellor
Bismarck!’
    Romanin nudged me, but I didn’t understand what he was trying to warn
me about.
    ‘The chancellor watched every one of these acts with his bulging eyes,’
the priest went on, ‘and said: “Ach, mein Gott! Here’s yet one more fine
little soldier for the Vaterland. Ach, mein Gott, how good it is of you to send
Germany all these ginger-haired lads.”’
    The priest walked slowly around the room, running a hand over the
spines of the books. It was as if he were counting them. Then he quickly
turned and said to us in Polish: ‘I’ve been collecting these books all my life.
Two thousand volumes of history. I wanted to save them, but where would I
ever get enough carts? And so, you see, I’ve remained behind with them.
You’re welcome to read them, any book you like, but I see you are very
tired. Go and rest.’
    The priest patted my shoulder with a dry, withered hand and went out, his
cassock swishing.
    ‘He’s really something, no?’ Romanin asked. ‘We’ve become friends.
What doesn’t he have here! Look – here’s a whole shelf devoted to
Suvorov. And over here, Napoleon. Up there, the Middle Ages and the
Church Fathers. ‘
    I reached for a thick volume in a cracked black leather binding. It was
Carlyle’s History of the French Revolution.
    ‘We’re off to Brest tomorrow at dawn,’ said Romanin, ‘and all this will
be destroyed! All these books, along with their eccentric owner. Go and
clean yourself up. You’re filthy. There’s a little banya in the garden. It’s
good and hot.’
    I went off to the banya. The steam bath was nothing more than a crooked
little shack surrounded by nettles that had grown as tall as the eaves. The
boiler was full of warm, muddy water. I picked up some rotten wood off the
floor – bits of boards from an old fence – shoved it under the boiler and lit
it. Damp air from the approaching evening streamed in through a broken
window.
    I got undressed and was amazed at how weighed down my clothes and
boots were with dust. I sat for a long time on the bench, smoking, my mind
blank, waiting for the water to heat up. I felt good here, alone in this brief
lull of solitude, the fresh air drifting in from the garden. Midges danced in
the pale shafts of sunlight. Tall weeds with white, umbrella-shaped flowers
stood just outside the windows. It was so still I could hear the horses
snorting in the garden where we had tethered them to some trees. Then
from far off there came a slow rumbling that rolled over the roof of the
banya and died away in the west.
    A grey tomcat jumped up onto the sill, looked at me and miaowed with
surprise. Next he walked around the walls of the entire banya before
stopping to peer inside my dark, empty boots. He miaowed again, but this
time as if asking for something, and began to rub himself against my legs. I
could almost hear the sound his thick fur made. I stroked him. The cat
purred with pleasure.
   ‘You’ve found a nice little spot for yourself far from the front!’ I said to
the cat. ‘No one’s going to bother you here. No men in steel helmets will for
some unknown reason hunt you down and try to kill you. How about we
switch places?’
   He pretended he hadn’t been listening to my words, and then slowly
sauntered out of the banya without even bothering to look back.
   ‘You little pig!’ I said as he left. ‘Selfish little pig!’
   I so wanted him to come back. I needed the presence of a living creature
who had no idea of war and who thought that the world was just as good as
it had been a month or a year ago, with the same butterflies fluttering about
in the garden, the same quiet calm of a village sunset, and the same worn
armchair in which to doze and then be awakened by a mysterious crackling
emanating from the dry bindings on the shelves. I was exhausted, my mind
a mess of thoughts and feelings. I wanted to clear my head and to be able to
finally think for a moment of what had long been missing from my life – a
bit of tenderness or a warm shoulder to lean on.
   ‘Mama,’ I said softly to myself, but immediately remembered her dry,
tightly pressed lips and her worried face. No, she could not help me. But
who then? I had lost Lëlya as well, and I’d never see her again. I had no
one. Perhaps in the future, if there was to be one, I might meet someone
with a kind soul.
   Once more a slow, rumbling echo rolled across the roof. Jackdaws
exploded from the elms around the house, cawing wildly as they flew.
Romanin came up to the window.
   ‘What happened? Did you fall asleep?’ he asked. ‘The priest has found
some cherry jam.’
   ‘I must have dozed off,’ I said.
   ‘You don’t look good,’ said Romanin. ‘What’s the matter? Hurry up and
come in to tea.’
   The church’s verger – an old man in a peasant coat – was laying out tea
in the library. He had covered the round table with a cloth and set out a few
glasses and a sugar bowl of thick, smoky glass. The cherry jam, as bright
and red as a pomegranate, stood out against this dull background. We pulled
out our provisions – tinned meat, hard tack and cranberry juice. That was all
we had. The cat sauntered in. His name was Beelzebub. We invited the
priest to the table. We all stood listening while he mumbled a brief blessing.
   ‘You have good manners, young men,’ he said with a smile.
   We sat down.
   ‘May God’s blessings be upon you,’ he said. ‘May the Blessed Virgin
watch over your every step. You don’t believe in her, of course. But that’s
no matter! May she watch over you and stay the hand of the enemy.’
   The priest moved his glass aside and turned to the verger, who was
drinking his tea. ‘Janosz,’ he said, ‘go and unlock the church. We’ll pray
through the night and tomorrow as well.’
   ‘Yes, Father,’ the verger replied softly and rose from the table. ‘Through
the night and tomorrow as well.’
   ‘We shall pray for the souls of the men killed in the war.’
   ‘Yes, Father,’ the verger repeated in a low voice, ‘we shall pray for the
souls of the men killed in the war.’
   ‘And then we shall celebrate a Mass for Poland, that she may rise from
the ashes like the phoenix.’
   ‘Yes, Father, like the phoenix from the ashes.’
   ‘Amen!’ said the priest.
   ‘Amen!’ mumbled the verger, lowering his head.
   The incantations of the priest together with the mumblings of the verger
had made Romanin and me uncomfortable. The priest somehow noticed. He
got up without saying a word and walked out. The verger limped after him.
   I lay down on a couch covered with a black oilcloth, pulled my greatcoat
over me and sank into a susurrating darkness. I woke up with a start. It
seemed to be late at night. Through the open window I could hear soft
noises coming from the dark of the garden, and then all was quiet again.
Clouds had apparently rolled in, and the sky was black, devoid of stars and
moon.
   I was in the embrace of a deep silence, yet I was certain I had been
woken by some sound. I lay there, waiting for its certain return. I wanted a
cigarette but held off lighting a match for fear of disturbing the safe
darkness of the night. I kept waiting. The longer I waited, the more I began
to fear this still unknown sound.
   I lay like this for a few minutes and then sat up with a jerk. My greatcoat
fell to the floor with a long, heavy swoosh. The sound came back –
jangling, drawn out, oppressive and terrifying, like some horrible cry. What
was it? The sound reverberated for a long time, but just as it was dying
away there came another, and then I recognised the measured tolling of the
church bells. The priest was offering his solemn litany for the dead. I
reached for my packet of cigarettes on the chair, but at that moment
something whistled over the roof, followed by a crimson flame, the thud of
an explosion and then a strange noise as if little stones were raining down
on a cobbled street. Romanin jumped up and lit a candle. Another whistle
overhead and another explosion, this one lighting up the entire garden.
    ‘We’re under attack!’ shouted Romanin. ‘Get dressed and then saddle the
horses. I’ll see to the carts.’
    Already dressed, I took an electric torch and went out into the garden.
The horses had their ears pinned back and were straining at the ropes to free
themselves. The other orderlies were by now awake and calling to each
other. The edge of the village was in flames, and this light made it easier for
us to get ready.
    We hurried. The infantry was retreating in ragged groups through the
village. As we drove past the church, I saw its doors had been thrown wide
open. The light from the candles was dazzling. Apparently, the verger had
lit every last one they had. A large crucifix loomed over the altar. The priest
stood in his surplice on the steps of the church. He held a black cross high
over his head. His battered old boots showed beneath his cassock. The
verger stood behind him. When we had pulled even with him, the priest
blessed us with the cross and called out loudly: ‘May the Holy Virgin, the
Lily of the Heavens, the Mother of all Sufferers, protect and keep you!’
    The flickering light from the burning village landed on the priest’s face
and lacy surplice in such a way that it appeared he was smiling.
    We left the village behind us. The gunfire died down. Dust from the
horses and the wet smell of the bogs hung in the air. Off in the distance the
cracked bell of the church was tolling again.
    ‘He’s bit off his rocker, I guess,’ said Romanin.
    Ignoring him, I turned up the collar of my greatcoat and lit a cigarette. I
was frozen to the bone. All I could think about was trying to get warm.

                              OceanofPDF.com
57
The Village of Kobrin



We left Brest for the village of Kobrin. Pan Gronsky went with us in his
scratched and battered Ford. Brest was in flames. They were blowing up the
fortress. The sky was thick with pinkish smoke.
   Outside Brest we picked up two children who had lost their mother. They
had been standing on the side of the road, clinging to each other – a little
boy in a torn school coat and a skinny girl of twelve. The boy had pulled
down the peak of his cap to hide his tears. The girl held him tight, her arms
around his shoulders. We made room for them in our wagons and covered
them with old coats. A biting rain began to fall.
   We arrived in Kobrin in the evening. The retreating army had trampled
the coal-black earth into thick mud. The wet muck reached up to the
doorsteps of the crooked little houses with their rotting, slanted roofs.
Horses neighed in the darkness, lanterns cast a dim light, wobbling
cartwheels clanked and rain poured from the roofs in noisy streams.
   In Kobrin we saw how what they call a tsaddik, a Jewish holy man, was
being taken from the village. Gronsky told us that there were several of
these tsaddiks in the western borderlands and Poland. They always lived in
small villages. Hundreds of people from all over the country came to
consult with them about their troubles. The villages lived off these visitors.
   A crowd of agitated women had gathered around a low-slung wooden
house. A covered wagon, drawn by four emaciated horses, stood by the
door. I had never seen such an ancient contraption. Several dragoons stood
around smoking. They were apparently to accompany the tsaddik for
protection along the way. Suddenly, the crowd let out a cry and ran towards
the door. The door flew open, and an enormously tall Jew, bristling with
black whiskers, stepped out carrying, like a baby in his arms, a completely
withered-up old man with a snowy beard wrapped in a blue coverlet. A few
old women in long cloaks and pale youths in caps and frock coats hurried
after the tsaddik. He was laid in the wagon, the old women and youths
climbed in, the commander ordered the dragoons to mount, and the wagon
set in motion, swaying and creaking through the mud. The crowd of women
ran behind it.
   ‘Did you know a tsaddik never leaves his home for his entire life?’ said
Gronsky. ‘Honest to God! And he’s fed by hand with little spoons. On the
word of a hakham!’
   In Kobrin we were billeted in a damp, old synagogue. It was empty
except for one man sitting in the dark and muttering what must have been
either prayers or curses. We lit our lanterns and saw an elderly Jew with
sad, suspicious eyes.
   ‘Oy, oy, oy, dear soldiers!’ he said. ‘What great happiness you’ve brought
us poor people.’
   We just stood there, sullen and silent. The orderlies had found a piece of
sheet metal in the courtyard and dragged it inside. We lit a fire on it and put
on a kettle to make tea. The two children sat in silence by the fire. Gronsky
walked in, the leather straps of his uniform squeaking, and said: ‘My
friends, unharness the horses. To hell with it! I’m not moving any farther
until dawn. The whole army’s pushing through the village now – we’d be
ground to dust. Find those children something to eat.’
   He looked at the children for a long time, and the flames from the fire
reflected in his eyes. Then he spoke to the girl in Polish. She answered him
in a whisper, not raising her eyes.
   ‘When will this all be over?’ Gronsky asked, out of the blue. ‘When will
we finally get our hands around the necks of the dogs who started this
bloody mess?’
   Gronsky swore. No one said a word. Then the old Jew stood up. He
approached Gronsky, bowed and asked: ‘Dear sir, do you happen to know
who benefits from this misfortune?’
   ‘I don’t. Nor do you, old man!’ replied Gronsky. ‘Nor do these children,
nor any of these people here.’
   Sparks flew in the darkness outside the windows; the field kitchens were
driving past the synagogue. ‘To the kettles, all of you. Get some soup!’ said
Gronsky. We went over to the kettles set up by the soldiers. The little boy
came with us. Orderly Spolokh held him firmly by the hand.
   A crowd of hungry refugees was trying to get to the kettles. The soldiers
held them back. Torches swung in the dark and seemed to catch nothing but
eyes – the glazed, bulging eyes of people who could see only the steaming
kettles. This crowd was more desperate than the one back in Vyshnitsa.
   ‘Let me go!’ someone yelled.
   The crowd lunged forward. It tore the little boy from Spolokh’s hand. He
stumbled and fell under the feet of several hundred people hurling
themselves towards the kettles. He didn’t even have a chance to cry out.
Men tore the bowls from each other’s hands. Women hurriedly stuffed bits
of hot, waxen pork into their starving babies’ mouths. Spolokh and I threw
ourselves towards the boy, but the crowd thrust us back. I was unable to
shout. A spasm gripped my throat. I pulled out my revolver and fired in the
air. The crowd drew back. The boy lay in the mud. There were tears on his
pale, dead cheeks. We picked him up and carried him to the synagogue.
   Spolokh cursed. ‘Well, just wait . . . just wait. Give us a moment to draw
our strength, and then we’ll make them pay for this,’ he said.
   We brought him in and laid the body down on a greatcoat. The girl saw
him and got up. She shook so hard we could hear her teeth chatter. ‘Mama!’
she whispered, backing towards the doors. ‘Oh, Mama!’ she cried and ran
out into the street.
   Convoys were rumbling by.
   ‘Mama!’ we heard her wail from outside.
   We stood there frozen, until Gronsky shouted at us: ‘Go and get her,
now! Move, damn you!’
   Romanin and the orderlies dashed out into the street. I ran after them.
The girl had vanished. I untethered my horse, jumped on and rode into the
thick of the carts, whipping at the sweaty horses to clear a way through. I
galloped down the street, then rode back and stopped some soldiers to ask
whether they had seen a girl in a grey coat. They didn’t even bother to
answer me.
   Wooden shacks on the edge of town had been set on fire. The glow
flickered in the puddles, intensifying the chaotic impression of carts, guns,
horses and wagons, that confused mass of a nighttime retreat. I returned to
the synagogue. The girl was not there. The boy lay on the coat as though
asleep, his cheek pressed against the wet cloth. The fire was dying, and I
didn’t find anyone in the damp, dark synagogue other than the elderly Jew
who sat beside the boy and was still muttering his prayers or his curses.
   ‘Where is everyone?’ I asked him.
   ‘How should I know?’ he answered with a sigh. ‘Everyone wants some
hot soup.’ He paused for a moment and then went on in a low, clear voice:
‘Sir, I am a saddle maker. My name is Josef Schifrin. I don’t know how to
say what is in my heart. Sir, we Jews know from our Prophets that God
punishes the wicked. But where is He, our God? Why did He not rip out the
eyes of the men responsible for this misfortune? Why did He not smite
them with fire?’
   ‘God? What’s God got to do with it?’ I said rudely. ‘You talk like a stupid
old man.’
   He gave me a sad smile. ‘Listen,’ he said and touched the sleeve of my
coat. ‘Listen, you are intelligent and educated.’
   He paused again. A steady glow shone through the synagogue’s dusty
windows.
   ‘I’ve been sitting here, thinking. I don’t know as well as you who exactly
is responsible for all this. I didn’t go to school. I didn’t even go to the
cheder. But I’m not completely blind, and I do see a few things. And so, I
ask you, sir, who will make them pay? Who will make them pay, and pay
dearly, for this little boy? Or are you all so kind and good that you’ll pity
and forgive them – those people who gave us this nice little present, who
gave us this war? Oh, my God, when will people finally come together and
make a decent life for themselves?’
   He stretched his arms up towards the ceiling of the synagogue, closed his
eyes and, swaying back and forth, let out a piercing cry. ‘Where is the man
who will avenge us? I don’t see the man who will dry the tears of the
suffering and give milk to the mothers whose babies suckle at their empty
breasts. Where is he who will sow the fields with grain for the hungry?
Where is he who will take the gold from the rich and give it to the poor?
May those who stain men’s hands with blood and rob the poor be cursed
until the end of the time! May they have no children, no grandchildren!
May their seed rot and their own spittle turn to poison in their mouths. May
the air they breathe turn to sulphur and the water they drink to boiling tar!
May the blood of this child poison the bread of the rich and may they choke
on it and die in anguish like tormented dogs!’
   The old man was screaming. He held out his balled fists and shook them
at the ceiling. His voice thundered through the synagogue.
   I was terrified and went out. Leaning back against the wall of the
synagogue, I lit a cigarette. It was drizzling, and the black of the night was
slowly settling upon the ground. The darkness seemed to deliberately shut
me in with my thoughts about the war. One thing was clear to me: no matter
what, we had to put an end to it. We had to use all our strength and every
last drop of our blood to bring peace and justice at long last to this
desecrated, beggared earth.

                            OceanofPDF.com
58
Treason



In Kobrin an order arrived to move north, and so we immediately set out
for the small village of Pruzhany near the Belovezha Forest. Along the way
we passed endless fields, now untilled and overgrown with wild mustard.
The ruins of Brest still smouldered to the south-west. In a field near
Pruzhany we saw a gun with a burst barrel and stopped. A group of soldiers
in crusty field coats sat around the gun. Some were smoking, others
winding their puttees, and a few were sitting about doing nothing and
looked at us with blank stares. I rode over to them.
   ‘What’s this?’ I asked a bearded soldier as I pointed to the gun. The
soldier was lying back against the wheel of the gun-carriage and smoking.
He gave me a brief look and said nothing.
   ‘What is this?’ I asked again.
   ‘Since when do I report to the likes of you?’ the soldier snapped back.
‘You’re no officer. Blind, are you? It’s a gun!’
   ‘Why’s the barrel broken?’
   The man shrugged and turned away. A young soldier missing his hat
answered for him. ‘What are you pestering us for?’ he said in a whiny
voice. His blond hair had been cropped so close that his head shone like a
glass ball. ‘You lot don’t give us a minute’s rest. It’s enough to make you
want to go and drown yourself.’
   ‘What’s he asking about?’ yelled a soldier with a greenish face. He was
squatting on his heels and scraping dirt off a biscuit with a twig. ‘What’s
wrong with him? Can’t he see for himself what’s happened to the gun? It’s
treason – that’s what it is!’
   ‘Treason!’ the bearded soldier repeated hoarsely, sitting up and flinging
away his cigarette. He clenched his black fist and shook it at the east where
the wind was bending the thin willows. ‘Treason! Cursed be their god, their
mothers and their souls! The artillery runs ahead of supplies, and so there
are no shells. The ones there are explode in the barrels. Cartridges too,
nothing. So, what are we fools supposed to fight the Germans with?’
   ‘Treason!’ several voices muttered. ‘Can’t be anything else.’
   Our wagons set in motion. I rode off.
   It was there, on the front, that I first heard that awful word – ‘treason’.
Soon it could be heard throughout the entire army and then the whole
country. Some whispered it, others roared it at the top of their lungs.
Everyone said it, from infantrymen to generals. Even the wounded, when
asked what had happened to them, angrily replied: ‘Treason!’
   There was more and more talk about War Minister Sukhomlinov. It was
said he had been accepting enormous bribes from the arms manufacturers
who supplied the army with dud shells. It wasn’t long before the rumours
reached the top, and Empress ‘Alix of Hesse’ was openly charged with
heading a German spy network in Russia. The indignation grew. And still
there were no shells. The army pulled back to the east, unable to stop the
enemy.

                                      •

We were travelling across the southern part of the province of Grodno,
feeding the refugees, sending them to the rear, picking up the sick and
taking them to hospitals. It began to rain hard. Large puddles of frothy
yellow water formed along the roads. The rain itself seemed as yellow as
horses’ piss. We couldn’t dry out and before long we began to smell like
wet dogs in our greatcoats. The wind howled incessantly in the bushes
along the roadsides and snapped the twigs like whips.
   Like a hungry man with a bone, the retreating army had picked the small
towns on the way – Pruzhany, Ruzhany, Slonim – bare. Nothing was left in
the shops, except for some ink and carpenter’s glue. ‘They’ve cleaned us
out,’ the frightened Jewish shopkeepers complained.
   Romanin and I hardly spoke anymore. His face, now shrouded under his
forage cap, which he kept permanently strapped down low against the wind,
looked harsh and angular. Pan Gronsky was always off somewhere in his
dilapidated Ford in search of food for us. He returned seldom, unkempt,
rumpled and exhausted, large bags under his eyes. He’d let his moustache
grow and it now covered his mouth. It made him look like an old man.
Every time he came back, he took me aside by the arm and told me in a
confidential whisper: ‘It’s nothing! Don’t worry, dear boy! When this hell
of a war’s over, we’ll head straight to Petrograd and toss that halfwit off the
throne and feed him and all his Hessians to the damned pigs. And Poland
will rise again. As God is my witness! A nation that produced the likes of
Mickiewicz, Chopin and Słowacki1 can never die! The best people of
Poland will gather around their memory, like soldiers around a campfire,
and they’ll swear to die or make her free.’
   Each time he told me the same thing, in the exact same words, as if he
were obsessed. I didn’t know whether he was exhausted or insane. His eyes
burned feverishly, and he gripped my arm so tightly that I nearly screamed
from the pain. I had heard somewhere that the insane often possessed
enormous strength.
   I confided my fears to Romanin. He gave me a sharp look and said with
spite: ‘Can you really tell who’s sane and who’s insane? Well, can you? No?
Well, then keep your damned notions to yourself ! I couldn’t care less.
Maybe I’m mad myself.’
   I had never before seen Romanin so angry.
   ‘Why don’t you lock up that beast of yours,’ I said, trying my best to
keep calm.
   He gave me an odd grin, grabbed me tightly by the shoulder, but then
pushed me away and walked off. That was in Slonim, in a small shop that
had until just recently sold paraffin. There were still puddles of it on the
scattered sheets of metal covering the floor. There was nowhere to sit. I
leaned against the wall, smoked a cigarette and then followed Romanin
outside.
   Our unit was already on the move. Rain poured off the men’s oil-skin
cloaks. Bedraggled crows descended out of the sky, landed on the rotten
rooftops, and then opened their beaks as if to caw. But no sound came out,
almost as if they had realised it was pointless. You can’t stop the rain by
cawing.


1   Juliusz Słowacki (1809–49), Romantic poet and dramatist.

                              OceanofPDF.com
59
In the Marshy Woods



Beyond Slonim lay vast, monotonous wooded marshlands. Row after row
of thin silvery aspens stood partly veiled behind a fine, bleak shroud of rain.
In the afternoon the sky finally cleared. It was green and cold. A biting
wind chased dark, ragged clouds. Romanin rode at the head of the column, I
at the back. I saw a young Belorussian peasant in sandals walk out of the
woods. He removed his cap, caught hold of Romanin’s stirrup, walked
along beside his horse, and seemed to be humbly pleading for something.
Tears shone in his eyes.
   Romanin stopped and called me over. ‘Over there in the woods,’ he said
without looking at me, ‘a refugee is giving birth. It’s this man’s wife.
Everyone’s gone and it’s just the two of them. He says his wife’s in
trouble.’
   ‘Sir, she’s in terrible pain,’ said the peasant, wiping his eyes with his cap.
   Romanin was quiet.
   ‘Go and deliver the baby,’ he said, fidgeting with his bridle and still
refusing to look at me. ‘None of us know how, including you, but at least
you’ve got clever hands, and that’s worth something.’
   Something in his voice made me think he was making fun of me. I felt
the blood drain from my face. ‘All right,’ I said, trying to control myself.
   ‘We’ll wait for you in Baranovichi.’ Romanin offered me his wet hand.
‘Need an orderly?’
   ‘I don’t need no damned orderly,’ I said.
   I took our bag of medicines and a simple surgical instrument – the only
one we had – and turned off along the forest track.
   The peasant – his name was Vasil – ran alongside, holding onto my
stirrup. Mud from my horse’s hooves splattered his face. He kept wiping it
off with his wet cap. I trotted on at a good pace. I tried not to think about
what was happening. I kept my mouth shut and my eyes fixed straight
ahead. I was terrified. Never in my life had I been anywhere near a woman
in labour. Suddenly I heard an angry wail and pulled up. Someone was
crying very close by.
   ‘Sir, hurry!’ said Vasil, now beside himself with worry.
   I whipped my horse and crashed through a thicket of hazel. Vasil had let
go of my stirrup and was soon far behind me. I came out in a small clearing.
I saw a young boy, about the age of ten with a black cap pulled down over
his ears, sitting next to a small, dying fire. Hugging his knees, he sat
rocking back and forth and chanting softly in a dull monotone: ‘Oy, Zosya!
Oy, Zosya! Oy, Zosya!’
   Smoke from the fire filled the clearing and hung in the low branches of
the thicket, making it difficult to see. I dismounted. There was a cart on the
other side of the fire with a woman on it. At first all I could make out was
her distorted black face and huge white eyes. She was howling, her mouth
stretched so wide it nearly split her lips. Her hands were dug in to the sides
of the cart. One moment thrusting forward, the next throwing herself back,
she howled and howled without stopping like some sort of animal. A mangy
dog with chattering teeth lay under the cart. My heart froze. Then the cold
rose to my head, and suddenly my fear vanished.
   ‘Quick, stoke the fire!’ I yelled at the boy.
   The boy jumped up, stumbled, fell and then bolted into the trees for more
wood. Vasil came running up. I had no idea what to do. I could only guess.
First of all, I threw off my greatcoat and washed my hands. Vasil poured
water on them from a pitcher. His hands were shaking so badly that most of
the water missed. The boy came back with wood and got the fire going
again. It was almost dark by now.
   ‘Get the boy out of here,’ I said to Vasil. ‘He shouldn’t see this.’
   ‘But she’s his sister,’ Vasil replied in a hurry. ‘There’s a spring in the
woods. He could go and fetch some water.’
   ‘Yes, water, water!’ I stammered. ‘And a clean towel or some rags.’
   ‘Zosya has two clean shirts,’ said Vasil, trying to be helpful.
‘Mikolaichik, run and fetch some water, I’ll find the shirts.’
   I had another sudden moment of doubt as I began to pull my tunic over
my head. Everything became dark in an instant, and I stopped. I wanted to
try to calm down and collect my thoughts. But what thoughts? What was I
thinking about? Nothing. I was aware of nothing other than despair.
   I finally pulled myself together, slipped off my tunic, rolled up my
shirtsleeves, pulled my electric torch from my pocket and handed it to Vasil.
‘Hold this!’
   I walked over to the cart. It seems I went deaf from fear, for I no longer
heard the woman’s screams, and I tried not to look at her. I saw something
pink and pitiful. I quickly yet carefully reached out and took hold of it and
then pulled hard. I didn’t know whether or not this was the right thing to do.
It all happened as if in a dream. To this day I can’t recall if the baby came
out then or only after more pulling. All I remember is the feel of its little
shoulders, or what I think were shoulders. I squeezed them and carefully,
yet forcefully pulled the baby towards me.
   ‘Sir!’ cried Vasil, grabbing me. ‘Sir!’
   I was standing and swaying back and forth. Something warm and wet lay
in my outstretched hands. Suddenly, this mysterious something sneezed.
   Everything that needed to be done after this I did with more composure,
although my head was still spinning. Vasil and I washed the baby and then
we swaddled it tightly in towels and rags. I held the child in my arms, afraid
to drop him. Vasil had dug his teeth into his coat sleeve and was shaking his
head and sobbing. I snapped at him, approached the woman and carefully
laid the baby down alongside her. She gave a slow, easy smile as she looked
at her baby and then touched it ever so slightly with her thin, dark hand.
This was her first child.
   ‘My dear little one,’ she cooed, ‘My light, my poor little son.’
   Tears poured from her wide eyes. Just then, the woman grabbed my hand
and pressed it to her hot, dry lips. I left it there so as not to upset her. Soon
my hand was wet from her tears. The infant squirmed and mewed feebly,
like a kitten. I took my hand away, and the woman reached for her baby and
then shyly pulled out a breast.
   Vasil had by now stopped crying and just stood there wiping his eyes
with his sleeve. The boy squatted on his heels and stared at the fire with a
happy expression on his face. A few gunshots crackled in the distance
beyond the woods. I washed my hands, threw my coat over my shoulders
and sat down by the fire. I gave Vasil a cigarette and then lit one for myself.
Never before had I enjoyed a cigarette more than on that gloomy night.
   My sense of relief didn’t last long. I was worried about the woman. I got
up and went over to the cart. In the flickering light of the fire, I thought her
face looked feverish. She appeared to be asleep, lying on her side and
holding her baby to her breast. Her thick eyelashes cast a shadow on her
cheeks.
   I looked at the woman closely for the first time and was amazed by the
happy and tender expression on her face. At the time I did not know that
after childbirth, if only for a short while, women’s faces are almost always
calm and beautiful. It must have been this beauty of motherhood that
inspired the great painters of the Renaissance – Raphael, Leonardo,
Botticelli – when they painted their Madonnas. I gently took the woman’s
hand and felt her pulse. It was weak but steady.
   Without opening in her eyes, the woman took my hand again and gently
stroked it, as if in her sleep. But this time she was not trying to thank me but
to reassure me. It was as if she were saying: ‘Don’t worry. I’m fine. Go and
rest.’
   How could I have imagined an hour ago as I rode along that muddy road,
my heart empty, that someone would treat me so kindly this very night?
Day after day of war dragged on like a night without shelter. I never could
have believed that in the utter loneliness of that night I would be so soon,
and so fleetingly, comforted by a smile of such human tenderness.
   Brief crackles of gunfire erupted again beyond the woods along the dark
horizon. It sounded as if they were chasing after each other.
   ‘Sir,’ Vasil called out to me, ‘the Germans are coming. What should we
do?’
   Against all common sense I felt strangely calm. ‘Nothing,’ I muttered.
‘We’ll stay here a few more hours. It would bad for her to be tossed about
on the road.’
   ‘You won’t leave us, will you, sir?’
   ‘No, I won’t.’
   Vasil calmed down and went to cook some gruel with the boy. I knew it
was dangerous to stay in the woods. Given the sound of the gunfire, I could
tell the Germans were close. Maybe they had broken through again, and
when that happened, the front always crumbled, vanished or just melted
away in an instant. But I simply did not want to leave.
   I sat down by the cart and stared at the fire. Nothing makes time move
faster than the sight of fire by night. I watched every last stick ignite, and
the sparks flying from the dry kindling, and the flaming, grey ash. The
woman’s breathing was quiet and steady. ‘No,’ I said to myself, ‘you can’t
escape this war, no matter how much you want to. You’re not the only one
in this world.’ I looked at my watch. I had been staring at the fire for two
hours.
   ‘Time to get ready,’ I told Vasil.
   We had some of the gruel. Zosya woke up and Vasil fed her. She ate
slowly and little and never took her eyes off the baby. Vasil kept trying to
get her to eat, but she gently pushed him away: ‘I don’t want any.’
   Dawn was a fair way off. Vasil harnessed the horses. We made Zosya as
comfortable as we could, covered her with two sheepskin coats, and then
the cart slowly headed out of the woods onto the main road. We were all
alone. The wind blew. The pines made a mournful sound. The gunfire had
died down.
   I rode a few steps ahead and pointed my torch now and then at potholes
and puddles so Vasil could avoid them. I knew from Romanin that we were
a few kilometres from Baranovichi’s old garrison camp. I hoped to find one
of the retreating field hospital units still there and get them to take Zosya
until she got her strength back. We were in luck. A field hospital had been
using one of the wooden huts and was getting ready to pull out. We had
arrived just in time.
   I went to see the head doctor. He was sitting in an empty hut, drinking tea
from a tin mug. An unshaven old man with the red eyes of a rabbit, he took
off his glasses and listened to me without saying a word. One of the ties
from his gown had dropped into his tea and got wet, and he sat there
squeezing it as he heard me out.
   ‘So you delivered the baby?’ he asked and gave me a disapproving look.
   ‘Yes.’
   ‘You mean, just like that?’
   ‘I had no choice,’ I replied in my defence.
   ‘No, there was nothing else you could do,’ the doctor agreed, dipping a
lump of sugar into his tea and popping it in his mouth. ‘Although the baby
seems to have come out on its own, so don’t bother putting on airs,
lieutenant.’
   ‘I’m not putting on airs.’
   ‘But you should. I would if I were you. Would you like some tea? You
probably should, because that’s all there is. We’re leaving soon. For now
put your refugee in the theatre. Tell the duty nurse I said so.’
   ‘Theatre? What theatre?’ I asked.
   ‘The Imperial Opera House in Petrograd,’ he said angrily. ‘Don’t be such
a fool. There’s a summer theatre here in the camp. Or rather there was. For
the officers. Take her there.’
   We carried Zosya over to the rotting hut that had served as a theatre. The
duty nurse was nowhere to be found, so we laid Zosya down ourselves in a
camp bed.
   At the far end of the hut was a stage. It was hidden behind a torn canvas
curtain crudely painted with a landscape of the Monk and the Devil’s Gate
at Simeiz. It was impossible to know why someone had chosen to depict
such a landscape – with these rock formations, this bright, blueprint-blue
sky and these black cypress trees – for this of all places.
   ‘Where’s the mother?’ asked a female voice from outside.
   I involuntarily moved away from the bed and into the shadows along the
wall. I recognised Lëlya’s voice.
   She walked in quickly. As always, a strand of curly hair had escaped
from under her scarf. Coming from the daylight into the dark barracks she
couldn’t immediately make out the woman on the bed or us men either.
   ‘Who brought her here?’ asked Lëlya.
   ‘He’s right here, the officer,’ muttered Vasil, pointing at me with his cap.
   Lëlya turned toward me.
   ‘You?’ she asked.
   I came out of the shadows and approached her. ‘Yes, Lëlya,’ I said, ‘I
did.’
   She turned white, stepped back, sat down on an empty bed and raised her
frightened eyes at me. ‘Oh my Lord,’ she whispered. ‘Hello there! Well,
don’t just stand there like some stuffed dummy.’
   Without getting up, she held out her hand. I bent over to kiss it, but Lëlya
grabbed me around the neck, pulled me towards her, and kissed me on the
lips.
   ‘At long last,’ she said. ‘You and I must have been born under a lucky
star.’

                              OceanofPDF.com
60
Under a Lucky Star



The field hospital was not supposed to leave until evening. I was afraid of
losing touch with my unit and told Lëlya that I had to go that very minute.
   ‘Stay,’ she said. ‘Just for an hour. That won’t make any difference. Wait,
I’ll be right back.’
   She left the hut. Zosya asked: ‘Who is that, sir? Your fiancée?’
   ‘Yes,’ I replied. What else could I have told her? Simple people want
simple answers.
   ‘Be quiet, Zosya!’ snapped Vasil, shocked by her question. ‘How dare
you speak to an officer like that. May the Lord protect you!’
   About ten minutes later an orderly came in and said the head doctor
wanted to see me. The doctor greeted me angrily. ‘Just what are you
wangling here, young man?’ he asked, his eyes flashing behind his thick
glasses.
   ‘Wangling? What do you mean?’
   ‘I’m sorry but I can’t think of a better word. What I mean is you’re a
civilian! Your unit belongs to the Union of Cities. That’s a civilian
organisation. I trust you know that while at the front you are under the
command of the military authorities?’
   ‘So it seems,’ I said.
   ‘No, not “it seems” – it in fact is!’ shouted the doctor, turning red in the
face and coughing. ‘And so I expect you to act accordingly, or I shall have
you arrested. “It seems . . . it seems’’,’ he went on, all puffed up, imitating
me.
   ‘Yes, sir. But I still don’t understand,’ I said.
   ‘You soon will. I am ordering you to remain here with the hospital until
further notice. The proper written orders will be prepared. They will be
handed to you in due course. For you to present to your CO. Who is your
CO?’
   ‘Commissioner Gronsky.’
   ‘Gronsky . . . Gavronsky . . . Pishiperdonsky!’ the doctor mimicked.
   I said nothing.
   ‘Oh, you, offended are you now?’ The doctor shook his head
reproachfully. ‘Stay here with us a few days. After that incident with the
mother I would be happy to have you to stay on permanently. Don’t be
embarrassed. I am well informed about everything. I was young once
myself. I’ve suffered too. And I hate old people who’ve forgotten what it
was like to be young. For some reason, we don’t give love its due.’
   The doctor let out a loud sigh. This conversation had made my head spin.
I suspected Lëlya was somehow involved.
   ‘There aren’t many men in our unit,’ I said. ‘I can’t just desert them, as
you can understand.’
   ‘Yes,’ he sighed again. ‘“Desert”! A rather big word you’ve chosen, but I
understand. It’s a tough situation. You’re going to Baranovichi, and so are
we. We’ll leave in two hours and not wait until night. We put the last of the
wounded on the hospital train yesterday, so no one’s left. You’ll travel with
us as far as Baranovichi, all right? We’ll take the mother with us too and
keep an eye on her.’
   I agreed. The doctor patted me on the shoulder. ‘Allow me to give you
some advice as an old man. Cherish love as something precious. Treat love
badly just once and the next one will be flawed. Yes, sir, it’ll be flawed,
defective. Well, off with you now. I’m glad to have met you.’
   I walked out of the hut and saw Lëlya. She was sitting nearby on a bench
under what looked like a slanting wooden mushroom. Mushrooms like this
had been built in camps for sentries. I went over to her. Lëlya bent down
and covered her face with her hands. ‘No, no, no!’ she said in a hurry,
shaking her head, her hands still covering her eyes. ‘What a spectacular fool
I am! I hate myself ! Go away, please.’
   ‘I’m staying,’ I said. ‘I’m going with you to Baranovichi.’
   Lëlya dropped her hands and stood up. Her fingers had left marks on her
cheeks. ‘Come with me!’ she said, taking me by the hand. We headed out
onto the main road.
   We walked to the first milestone and then turned around. The wind
whipped the water in the puddles. Storm clouds were again blowing in from
the west, piling up along the dim horizon.
   We walked in silence, holding hands. Lëlya only said that after Odessa
she had left immediately for Moscow and managed to get transferred to a
field hospital on the western front. She didn’t explain why she had done
this. But it was obvious, and neither she nor I cared to speak about it. We
both knew that however wise or tender our words, they would sound wrong
and that we still lacked the words capable of expressing the aching feeling
of intimacy – a feeling between two people still almost strangers – that had
sprung up in both of us now.
   The hospital set out at two o’clock in the afternoon. The medical wagons
moved along one after another. Vasil trailed after them on his cart. His
shaggy dog, tied to the cart, did his best to keep up. I trotted alongside the
field ambulance that was carrying Lëlya and an elderly nurse in gold
glasses. Now and then I dropped back to see how Zosya was getting along
in Vasil’s cart. She always gave me a cheerful nod and said she was fine.
But Vasil looked gloomy – no doubt he was thinking about what lay ahead:
would they manage to catch up with the other refugees from their village or
would they become lost and alone among strangers in Belorussia?
   About twenty versts from Baranovichi, a few armed soldiers stood on the
road. Alongside them was an officer on a mud-spattered horse. The officer
raised his arm. Our convoy stopped. The officer rode up to the head doctor,
saluted and began to report to him about something. The doctor, chewing on
his moustache, gave him a sullen look. They were discussing something
alarming. We felt it and became anxious. We soon learned that there were a
good many sick refugees in a nearby village – it was visible from the road –
and the officer, upon the order of the corps commander, was asking the
doctor to send some of the medical staff to offer them first aid. The doctor
agreed, and three wagons were sent to help.
   ‘You’re coming with us,’ Lëlya said. ‘It’s your job to help refugees. We’ll
catch up with the convoy this evening in Baranovichi.’
   ‘All right, let’s go.’
   We turned off onto a side road. The hospital convoy moved on. Vasil
stood on the road for a long time watching us go. He seemed to be
wondering whether or not to come with us. But finally, he shook the reins
and shouted at his horses, and his cart set off down the road towards
Baranovichi. A kilometre from the main road we spied in the bushes some
soldiers armed with rifles and a machine-gun.
   ‘Are the Germans really that close?’ asked the nurse with the gold
glasses. ‘Please, go and ask them.’
   I rode over to the soldiers.
   ‘Ride on!’ said a soldier in corporal stripes. He didn’t even bother to look
at me. ‘You can pass. I’m disobeying orders by even talking to you, so keep
moving. No one is allowed to stop here.’
   We rode on. It started to rain. We could already see the beginnings of the
village. From our vantage point the wretched place looked like an oozing
pile of dung.
   ‘It looks as though they’re waiting for the Germans,’ I said to Lëlya.
   I looked to the west, the direction from which the Germans would
probably come, and saw another outpost in a pasture that sloped down
towards a gully. The soldiers were sitting and lying in a long chain, rather
far from each other. Now it all made sense – it must be to stop the Germans.
   ‘They’re not here to stop the Germans,’ said the orderly who was driving.
‘This is something else. Look over there!’ He pointed to the east. More
soldiers. ‘The whole village is surrounded!’ said the driver. His voice was
anxious. ‘They’re everywhere. I’ve got a feeling something’s not right
here.’
   ‘What’s wrong?’
   ‘I don’t know myself, but we shouldn’t have come. We really shouldn’t
have.’
   The driver proved to be right. We drove into the deserted village. At the
gate stood an empty Red Cross wagon from some unidentified mobile unit.
The wagon’s driver shared with us the staggering news: we were trapped.
   There was smallpox in the village. The army had encircled it, and
thousands of refugees had stopped for the moment at nearby villages.
Smallpox could easily spread to the army, and so orders had been given to
send a mobile hospital unit to isolate the village and keep anyone from
escaping. Anyone who tried to leave was to be shot.
   The officer who had stopped us on the road had said nothing about
smallpox. Our initial reaction was anger – not because we had been caught
in a trap, but because we had been tricked into going to the village. Even
had we known the truth, every last one of us would have volunteered to go
in and help.
   ‘The utter stupidity!’ said Lëlya angrily. ‘If they hadn’t lied to us, we
could have brought everything we needed to treat the sick. But now we
don’t have a thing, not even any vaccines!’
   ‘It’s not clear whether it was stupidity or something else,’ the driver
remarked.
   ‘What are you talking about?’ snapped the nurse with the gold glasses,
Vera Sevastyanovna.
   ‘Well, who knows?’ he muttered. ‘The bosses always have their own
notions. They’re cunning like that, more so than us.’
   We couldn’t set up in any of the huts; they were all full of sick villagers.
There was one empty shed on the common pasture. The crew from the
mobile unit had already found it. We carried our medicine and other things
inside. The mobile unit consisted of a doctor, a nurse and two orderlies. We
found the nurse in the shed. She was sulky and had no eyebrows. We could
hardly get a word out of her.
   ‘This is one hell of a mobile unit!’ our orderlies commented. ‘More like a
society of undertakers!’
   We unpacked our medicines. The doctor from the mobile unit appeared.
He was a flabby young man with puffy eyes and dark bristles on his cheeks.
   ‘Well, well . . . greetings!’ he said upon seeing us. It seemed our presence
was an unpleasant surprise. ‘Do you have any idea what you’ve let
yourselves in for?’
   ‘Smallpox,’ I answered.
   ‘Precisely! And do you know what smallpox is, young man? Have you
seen it with your own eyes?’
   ‘No, I haven’t.’
   ‘Well, then, let me be the first to congratulate you! Do you have any
vaccines? No! Wonderful, just wonderful. So just what is it you’re planning
to do here then? Crank up the gramophone? Listen to a little Vyaltseva
perhaps?’
   We just stood there, saying nothing.
   ‘As for me, I’ve had quite enough! I’m done with fooling around,’ said
the doctor.
   ‘How dare you speak like that!’ a furious Lëlya yelled at him.
   ‘Mademoiselle!’ The doctor’s eyes blazed with fury. ‘None of your little
tantrums, please, even if they do suit you. Yes, you are indeed quite lovely
when angry, but other than that your tantrums do nothing. I repeat, nothing!
Just some empty pretty sounds. We’re all in this trap. How did Pushkin put
it: “Oh, you’re trapped, little bird, stay, for there’s no escape from my net”?
Something like that, wasn’t it?’
    ‘Stop clowning around, doctor,’ said Lëlya disapprovingly. ‘It’s
disgusting.’
    ‘Ridi, Pagliaccio!’ the doctor sang with a laugh. ‘What else can I do?
Perhaps you can suggest a way out of this filthy mess?’
    ‘He’s drunk,’ said Vera Sevastyanovna.
    ‘Yes, indeed, if you wish, I’m drunk!’ the doctor replied calmly, not
insulted in the least. ‘Got any morphine?’
    ‘Very little. But we do have a lot of camphor.’
    ‘If you had morphine, I’d put them all to sleep. That would do the trick!’
    ‘That’s enough of this foolish nonsense!’ I said roughly. ‘Give us
everything you have. We’ll do the work ourselves.’
    ‘Delighted! You are doing me a favour! Please, do help yourselves!’ He
bowed theatrically. ‘I’ll give you all our vaccines. Go ahead and inoculate
all those sick people. For everyone here is already sick. This is certain to be
a remarkable medical experiment.’
    I went straight up to him. ‘You know what, you had better hold your
tongue or I’ll throw you out, captain or no captain. Military regulations
don’t mean a thing here.’
    ‘Absolutely right,’ he agreed. ‘No rules or regulations. Just like in a
plague-stricken city. Take the vaccines! Get to work! As for me, I want to
sleep. I haven’t slept for two days. That’s something you young idealists
ought to keep in mind as well.’
    He walked over to a corner of the shed, collapsed onto the straw and fell
asleep as he was pulling his greatcoat over himself.
    ‘Let him sleep, he needs it,’ said Vera Sevastyanovna. ‘Nurse, give us
your vaccines.’
    ‘You need to sign for them,’ she replied. It appeared she had not been
paying any attention to our conversation with the doctor.
    I signed and the nurse gave us the medicine.
    ‘Well, now what?’ Lëlya whispered to me.
    ‘Good question.’ I answered. ‘Whatever we do, it’s probably useless. You
stay here, and I’ll start by making the rounds of the huts with one of the
orderlies. Let’s see what I find.’
    ‘No! I’m not letting you go by yourself. And it’s not because I can’t do
without you.’ She blushed ever so slightly. ‘No! It’s just that it won’t be so
terrible if we all stick together.’
   The four of us – Vera Sevastyanovna, Lëlya, the orderly and I – left
together.
   A dreary rain blanketed the fields. Potato stalks littered the vegetable
plots like piles of broken, black bones. It was already autumn. Our legs
slithered through the wet clay mixed with manure and rotting straw. Not a
wisp of smoke rose from the hovels, but for some reason the air smelled of
scorched feathers. The stench was coming from a pile of old rags still
smouldering near a fence on the far side of the village.
   ‘They’re burning all the sick villagers’ old rags and things,’ said the
orderly and then added with a laugh, ‘They call it disinfecting!’
   There were no dogs or chickens left in the village, just one
undernourished cow mooing in a shed. It made a plaintive sound as it
choked on its thick saliva.
   ‘Yes,’ said Vera Sevastyanovna all of a sudden, ‘it’s just like Dante’s
Inferno.’
   We went into the first hut we saw. On the front step, Lëlya tied gauze
bandages over our mouths. I opened the door. A warm stench hit us in the
face. The hut’s windows had been covered. At first, we couldn’t make
anything out. There was just a child’s monotone voice that kept repeating
over and over the same words: ‘Oy, Grandpa, untie my hands . . . oy,
Grandpa, untie my hands.’
   ‘Don’t touch a thing!’ Vera Sevastyanovna ordered. ‘Let’s have some
light.’
   I switched on my electric torch. Other than a broken wooden bed covered
in a pile of tattered clothes we couldn’t see a thing. A pair of legs that ended
in some old leather shoes hung down from the stove, but the actual person
to whom they belonged wasn’t visible.
   ‘Anyone still alive up?’ asked the orderly.
   ‘Don’t even know myself if I’m alive or dead,’ came a weak voice from
above.
   I shone the light. An old man in a brown tunic sat on top of the stove. He
had a patchy beard, as if clumps of it had been torn out.
   ‘Thank goodness somebody’s finally come,’ he said. ‘Hey, soldiers, give
me a hand, I, um, I can’t pull him down by myself.’
   ‘Who?’
   ‘He’s lying right here next to me, my daughter’s husband. He’s been here
since last night. Hot as an oven he was, but I just touched him now and he’s
as cold as a stone. I don’t like it.’
   ‘Oh my God,’ Lëlya whispered. ‘What’s that?’
   The pile of rags on the bed began to move, and the child’s voice began
again: ‘Oy, Grandpa, I can’t stand it anymore. Untie my hands.’
   ‘Those two up there are beyond help,’ said Vera Sevastyanovna. ‘Shine
the light over here.’
   I lit up the bed with my torch, and we saw a pair of eyes – huge, black
eyes, bright with fever – and crimson cheeks. A girl about the age of ten lay
under the rags. I carefully pulled the rags off her. She trembled and
squirmed and then held out her hands that had been tied together with a
strip of old towel. Her shirt had fallen open at her chest, and for the first
time I saw smallpox – flaming purplish spots dotted with black centres that
looked like dried tar. The spots appeared as if they had been glued onto the
girl’s greenish skin. The girl shook her head from side to side. Her dark hair
fell loose, exposing a crumpled red ribbon.
   The orderly brought in some cold water from the porch. He was upset to
see how her hands had been tied to keep her from scratching her sores. ‘Oh,
why this cruelty?’ he muttered. ‘Why torture the poor souls?’
   Lëlya gave the girl something to drink. I held her head. Even with my
leather gloves on I could feel the dry fever coming off the nape of her thin
neck.
   ‘Give me the camphor!’ said Vera Sevastyanovna.
   The smell of ether filled the room. After the camphor, we injected the girl
with morphine. Lëlya wiped her face with sweet-smelling vinegar.
   ‘Well,’ the orderly said to me, ‘let’s carry out the dead man.’
   Lëlya took me by the hand, but then quickly let go. Her eyes begged me
not to touch the dead man’s body, but she said: ‘Just remember . . . All
right, never mind!’
   The corpse lay on a heavy linen sheet. We grabbed the corners of the
sheet and carried the body out, trying not to touch it. The body fell onto the
floor just as we got to the door.
   ‘Dump him in the shed,’ the old man said. ‘There are two of them in
there already.’
   The shed door was propped open with some pitchforks. Inside lying face
down on the dirt floor was an old woman and next to her a little girl of
about five.
   ‘Oh, this war, this war!’ said the orderly. ‘I’d like to take all the generals
and politicians and rub their faces in this stinkin’ mess. The damned
butchers!’
   We went back to the hut. It had to be aired out, but it was already cold
outside, as it is before the first snow of the season.
   ‘We should light the stove,’ the orderly said, ‘but they’ve burned up
every last bit of wood. There isn’t a log left.’
   He went out, and we could hear him swearing as he ripped up boards
from the porch steps. We opened the doors and lit the stove.
   ‘Come on down, Grandpa,’ said Vera Sevastyanovna. ‘We’re going to
inoculate you.’
   ‘What for?’ he answered indifferently. ‘I’m not going to live. Either way
I’ll starve to death. No need to waste your medicines on me.’
   But we inoculated him just the same, aired out the hut and left after
promising the old man to send him some bread. It got worse and worse after
that. We gritted our teeth and kept on working, avoiding each other’s eyes.
The orderly cursed under his breath the whole time, but we paid him no
attention. It seemed that everywhere we looked we saw smallpox, in all its
varied manifestations.
   ‘This is pointless,’ Vera Sevastyanovna finally said. ‘We can’t save
anyone. None of them were ever vaccinated. That fool of a doctor was
right, of course.’
   ‘Really?’ asked Lëlya. ‘Then what are we to do?’
   ‘Make sure we don’t catch it ourselves. That’s all.’
   ‘And the sick?’
   ‘Morphine,’ Vera Sevastyanovna said curtly. ‘To ease their suffering.’
   The orderly spat and cursed. And cursed again a few more times. We
returned to our shed, and Vera Sevastyanovna inoculated the entire staff.
This was the beginning of a dark and agonising time for us.
   We went from hut to hut, injecting the dying with morphine and giving
them water to drink and watching in silent despair as the last few who had
escaped the disease eventually fell ill themselves. We dragged the dead into
the sheds. The doctor from the mobile unit ordered the sheds to be burned.
He gave the order himself each time; it seemed to cheer him up. The
orderlies laid straw around the outside of the sheds and set fire to it. The
sheds resisted the flames at first, but then burned wildly, giving off heavy
smoke.
   Our shed reeked of carbolic acid. The acid had blistered our hands so
badly that we couldn’t wash them. The pain from the water was unbearable.
The nights were easier. We lay side by side on the straw, covered by our
coats and felt rugs. It wasn’t until sometime in the middle of the night that
we finally warmed up, and we never did sleep well.
   The doctor had settled down by now and liked to ramble on in a low
voice about his family back in Berdyansk – his wife, a thrifty homemaker,
and his son, the cleverest little boy in the world. But no one listened to him.
Everyone was busy with their own thoughts.
   I lay between Lëlya and a quiet, freckled orderly – a Pole by the name of
Syrokomla. He often cried at night. We knew that at the front people cried
only about the death of loved ones. But none of us said a word, and no one
ever tried to comfort him. Those were wasted tears. They did not lessen his
grief; just the opposite – they only added to it. Sometimes during the night
Lëlya also wept, silently, holding my hand tightly. Only the slight trembling
of her body told me she was crying. I would gently stroke her hair and wipe
away the tears on her cheeks. She would press her hot face to my hand and
begin to cry even harder. Vera Sevastyanovna said again and again: ‘Lëlya,
don’t. Try to stay strong.’
   Her words helped. Lëlya calmed down.
   When my coat slipped off during the night, Lëlya always pulled it up
over me again. We never spoke to each other at night. We just lay there in
silence and listened to the rustling of the straw under the eaves. Once in a
while we heard a distant gunshot. Then, we would raise our heads from the
straw and listen. We all wanted the front to reach us as soon as possible.
   One night, I don’t remember when, Lëlya whispered to me: ‘If I die,
don’t burn me in a shed.’ Her whole body was trembling.
   ‘Don’t talk nonsense!’ I told her. I took her hand in mine and felt my
heart skip a beat. Lëlya’s hand was as cold as ice.
   I touched her forehead – it was burning.
   ‘Yes,’ she said sadly. ‘Yes . . . I felt it coming on yesterday. Just don’t
leave me alone, stay with me, my sweet darling.’
   I woke Vera Sevastyanovna and the doctor. The orderlies woke up too.
We lit the lanterns. Lëlya turned away from the light. For a long time no
one spoke. Finally, Vera Sevastyanovna said: ‘The hut next door is empty.
We need to scrub and disinfect it and then heat it up.’
   The orderlies discussed it among themselves and then, after some sighs,
went out. The doctor took me aside and said in a low voice: ‘I will do
everything I can. Understand? Everything!’
   I said nothing and just shook his hand. Lëlya called me.
   ‘Goodbye,’ she said, looking at me with an odd, peaceful smile.
‘Although it was short, still I was happy . . . Very. It’s just that I couldn’t
say it . . .’
   ‘I’ll stay with you,’ I replied. ‘I’m not leaving you, Lëlya.’
   She shut her eyes and shook her head, just as she had before on that
bench under the wooden mushroom.
   As hard as I try, I can no longer quite remember what happened next. I
only recall bits and pieces. I recall the cold hut. Lëlya sitting on the bed,
Vera Sevastyanovna undressing her. I was helping. Lëlya sat with her eyes
closed. She was having trouble breathing. I saw her young, bare body for
the first time and it struck me as precious and tender. It was horrifying to
consider that her long, slender legs, her graceful arms and her delicate
breasts had already been touched by death. Everything about her feverish,
helpless body was dear – from the fine hairs on the nape of her neck to the
mole on the dark skin of her hip.
   We laid her down in bed. She opened her eyes and said in a clear voice:
‘Leave my clothes here. Don’t take them away!’
   Vera Sevastyanovna and I never left her side. Late in the evening Lëlya
seemed to lose consciousness. She had stopped tossing about and lay so
quietly that at times I became frightened and leaned over her to make sure
she was still breathing. Night dragged on slowly. There were no signs to tell
us how much longer until morning – no cocks crowing, no footsteps of
passers-by, no stars in the heavy sky. Towards dawn Vera Sevastyanovna
left for the shed to go and lie down for an hour.
   When the morning light began to filter in through the windows, Lëlya
opened her eyes and called to me. I bent down over her. She pushed me
back with a feeble hand and for a long time stared into my face with such
tenderness, grief and worry that I couldn’t bear it. My throat seized up, and
I started to cry for the first time in the many years since my half-forgotten
childhood.
   ‘Don’t, my dear friend,’ said Lëlya. Tears filled her eyes. ‘Put the jug of
water here next to me on the stool . . . Over in the shed . . . there’s some
cranberry juice. Go and get it . . . I’m thirsty . . . I want something sour.’
   I got up.
   ‘And . . .’ Lëlya said, ‘I want to tell you . . . my darling, my one joy . . .
don’t cry. I’ve forgotten everyone . . . even Mother . . . Only you.’
   I rushed out to the porch, brought Lëlya the water, and then hurried off to
the shed. When I returned with the cranberry juice Lëlya was sleeping
quietly, and her face, with its half-opened mouth, amazed me by its
unnatural pale beauty. I had arrived too late with the juice. Not waiting for
me, Lëlya had drunk some water. She had spilled a little of it on the floor
around her bed.
   I don’t remember how long I remained by Lëlya’s side, standing guard
over her sleep. A faint light was already filtering through the window when
I realised Lëlya wasn’t breathing. I grabbed her hand. It was cold. No
matter how I tried, I couldn’t find a pulse. I raced over to the shed to wake
Vera Sevastyanovna. Together with the doctor, the three of us ran back to
the hut where Lëlya lay.
   Lëlya was dead. Vera Sevastyanovna found a box of morphine on the
stool under her clothes. The box was empty. Lëlya had sent me to fetch the
cranberry juice so she could take a fatal dose of morphine.
   ‘Well,’ said the doctor, ‘she had earned an easy death.’
   Vera Sevastyanovna was silent.
   I sat down on the floor next to the bed and hid my face in the upturned
collar of my coat. I sat there for I don’t know how long. Then I got up, went
over to Lëlya, lifted her head and kissed her eyes, her hair and her cold lips.
Vera Sevastyanovna pulled me away and ordered me to immediately rinse
out my mouth with some caustic liquid and scrub my hands.
   We dug a deep grave on a small hill outside the village near an old
willow tree. The tree was visible from far away. The orderlies made a coffin
out of some old, blackened boards. I took the plain silver ring off Lëlya’s
finger and hid it in my rucksack. Lëlya was even more beautiful in the
coffin than she had been just before her death. Filling in the grave, we heard
gunshots. There were only a few of them, at regular intervals.
   That same day we learned that the village was no longer surrounded. The
soldiers had left without bothering to inform us. Perhaps the gunfire had
been intended as a signal, but we didn’t understand.
   We left the village at once. The countryside all around was deserted.
After we had gone about half a verst, I stopped and turned my horse round.
Far off through the light fog of a gloomy autumn day, I could see under the
leafless willow tree the small cross over Lëlya’s grave. It was all that
remained of her once vibrant young soul, of her voice, her laugh, her love
and her tears. Vera Sevastyanovna called to me.
   ‘Go on ahead,’ I said. ‘I’ll catch up with you.’
   ‘Promise?’
   ‘Go on!’
   The convoy started. I sat there motionless on my horse, looking back at
the village. I felt that the slightest movement would break that final thin
thread connecting me to life, I would fall from my horse, and all would be
over. The convoy stopped a few times to wait for me and then disappeared
from sight behind a stand of trees.
   I rode back to the grave. I dismounted and didn’t bother to tether my
horse. It whinnied softly, its nostrils flaring nervously. I knelt down by the
grave and pressed my head into the cold earth. Beneath this thick, wet soil
lay a young woman born under a lucky star.
   What was I to do? Stroke this clay that touched her face? Dig up the
grave to see that face and kiss those eyes one last time? What was I to do?
   Someone grabbed me by the shoulders from behind. I turned around. It
was the orderly Syrokomla. He held a grey horse by the reins. This was the
doctor’s horse.
   ‘Let’s go!’ said Syrokomla, looking at me uncomfortably with his light
eyes. ‘Stop this!’
   I couldn’t get my foot into the stirrup for a long time. Finally, Syrokomla
held it for me. I mounted and rode off slowly through the cold, leaden
puddles.

                             OceanofPDF.com
61
The Bulldog



My unit was not in Baranovichi. It had already moved on towards Nesvizh,
the commandant told me. I didn’t want to go back to the hospital even for a
little while. It was too hard to be around people. I spent the night in a
signalman’s hut outside town on the line to Minsk, and then left in the
morning for Nesvizh. I let my horse go at his own pace. He walked along
slowly, even stopping at times to think about something. Or perhaps to rest.
After a bit he would move on again, shaking his head as he went.
    It was a fresh autumn day, free of rain but with dreary clouds hanging
low over the fields. I reached a small village by midday. I don’t recall its
name. I decided to stay the night there. The retreat had slowed down, and
our unit could not go any farther than Nesvizh. I was certain I’d catch up
with it tomorrow.
    The village hugged the shores of a small lake at the bottom of a hollow.
At the far end of the lake water rushed over the dam by an old mill. Dark
willows stretched out so far over the lake that it appeared they might lose
their balance at any moment and fall into the deep water. I asked some old
Jewish women where I could stay for the night. They pointed me towards a
simple inn, a broken-down wooden building that reeked of paraffin and
herring. The inn-keeper, a tiny Jew with a shock of red hair on his head,
said yes, of course, he had a place where I could sleep for the night, but it
was a small room and I would have to share it with an artillery officer and
so it would be tight. He led me to the room. It was as narrow as a coffin.
The officer wasn’t there, but his camp bed had already been set up. There
was just enough room for my bed, but not enough for either of us to sit
down on them.
    ‘Your home for the night!’ said the innkeeper. ‘It’s nice and quiet here,
and we don’t have any bedbugs, as God is my witness! You can have an
omelette for supper or I can boil you some milk.’
   ‘But what about the officer?’ I asked. ‘Will he agree to this?’
   ‘Oh, good God!’ he cried. ‘That’s funny! Dvoira, did you hear what he
asked? This here is no officer. This is an angel from heaven.’
   I took my horse to the barn, fed him and then headed off for the village. I
didn’t want to talk to anyone, or even hear the talk of others. Every word I
spoke and every word I heard increased the distance between Lëlya and me.
My pain was all I had left of her, and I feared its being blunted or softened.
I had to guard it as the last thing that remained of our love. Poetry was the
only language that didn’t upset me and from which I didn’t feel the need to
hide. Verses kept coming to me for mysterious reasons from the hidden
depths of my memory, and the comfort they offered was neither obtrusive
or painful.
   I walked over to the lake, sat down on the shore under a willow, and
listened to the sound of the water flowing through the rotten mill-race.
Towards evening a soft yellowish glow tinged the clouds. Somewhere
beyond the rim of the earth the sun was shining its meagre light. The water
mirrored the yellow sky. Under the willows it was already cold and damp. I
recalled a few lines I had read long ago whose author I had forgotten: ‘An
old miller opened to me his home by the black willows, on my nighttime
journey . . .’
   There was nothing special about the lines. But somehow, for me, they
held a magical healing power. The loneliness of my nighttime journey
soothed me for some strange reason. But almost at once I buried my face in
my hands – familiar words came to me in an echo of that sweet voice across
a vast, cold, windswept distance. There the heavy dusk was gathering over
an abandoned grave. There lay the girl from whom I never should have
been parted, not even for a single hour. I distinctly heard her words:
‘Springtime, you have no name. For you, my distant one, there is no
name.’1 These had been her favourite lines. I repeated them now, but my
ears heard the distant voice of Lëlya, not my own. It was a voice neither I
nor anyone else would ever hear again.
   I got up and walked towards the field beyond the village. Dusk now filled
all the air between the sky and the rust-brown fields. It was already difficult
to see the road, yet still on and on I walked. A dull glow rose over the
village of Luninets. To the north, a lone white star shone above a hut that
sat dark and lonely amid the fields. ‘Her lucky star!’ the thought struck me.
‘The one she had believed in a few days before her death.’ No, I told
myself, it is simply impossible to accept the permanent disappearance of a
fellow human being.
   It was dark when I returned to the inn. My camp bed had been set up in
the little room. The artillery officer, his face brown from the sun and his
eyebrows singed by fire, lay in bed reading a book by candlelight. As I
entered, I heard a ragged growl coming from under his bed.
   ‘Mars, quiet!’ said the officer. He sat up and extended a hand.
‘Lieutenant Vishnyakov. Glad to have a roommate. Think we can get any
sleep in here tonight?’ he asked, a note of doubt in his voice.
   ‘Dvoira!’ shouted the innkeeper from behind the wall. ‘Why don’t you go
and see if the gentlemen officers want something to eat?’
   I wasn’t hungry but had a cup of tea and then lay down. The artillery
officer was a quiet fellow, which came as a relief. A large yellow bulldog
crawled out from under his bed, came over and stared at me in the face for a
long time.
   ‘He’s begging for sugar,’ said the officer. ‘Don’t give him any. He’s
picked up a bad habit of begging. It’s torture having a dog with you at the
front, but I’d hate to get rid of him. He does make an excellent watchman.’
   I patted the dog. He grabbed my hand with his teeth and held it there for
a minute to frighten me and then let go. It seemed he was a friendly sort. I
lay there with my eyes closed for a long time. Ever since childhood I had
loved to lie like this, pretending to be asleep, and dreaming up all sorts of
adventures or travelling with closed eyes around the world.
   But now I didn’t want to make up adventures or travel. I only wanted to
remember. I recalled my time with Lëlya and bemoaned the fact that even
though we had lived side by side for a long time, still we had been so
distant from one another. It was not until Odessa that everything had
become clear to us. Or perhaps it had happened earlier, the day we had sat
in the poor Polish hut on the river Vepsh and listened to the fairytale about
the lark with the golden beak. Or even earlier, in Khentsiny, when Lëlya sat
at my beside all night long as the rain poured down.
   Then I recalled Romanin. What had happened to him? Why had he
become so rude to me? It must have been my fault. I understood that my
habit of giving in to people – what he called my unsteadiness – irritated
him, as did my tendency to see the good in everything, even in things that
were in clear opposition to each other, which he called spinelessness. To
him I was a ‘wobbly intelligènt’, and what made it all the harder to bear
was that I was the only one he treated so unfairly. ‘I’m not like that at all,
and that’s the truth,’ I told myself, but how was I to prove that to him?
    The clatter of metal wheels woke me in the middle of the night. The
artillery was passing through the village. I drifted off after that and fell back
asleep. I sat up in terror at the sound of a strange wailing in the room. At
first I thought it was the dog, but then I heard the officer’s bed creak and
shake. I lit a candle. He was groaning and writhing in convulsions. Yellow
foam oozed from his mouth. It was ‘falling sickness’, an epileptic fit. I had
seen a great many of them on the hospital train and knew just what to do. I
had to put a spoon in the officer’s mouth and hold it there so he didn’t bite
or swallow his tongue. There was a spoon in my cup of cold tea on the
windowsill. I grabbed it and tried to stick it in his mouth, but there was so
little room to move and he shook and thrashed so violently I couldn’t. I got
on top of him and pinned him down to the bed when all of a sudden, I felt a
stabbing pain in my neck and a heavy weight on my back. Not
understanding what had just happened, I tried to shake it off until I felt the
sharp fangs digging deep into my neck. In defence of his master, the dog
had leapt on me from behind without making a sound. He thought I was
strangling him.
    His jaws tightly clenched, the dog tried to swallow. I could feel the skin
tighten around my neck and knew that in seconds I would pass out. With
my last bit of remaining strength, I forced myself to pull my Browning from
under the pillow, point it behind me next to my ear, and fire.
    I never heard the shot go off. All I heard was the heavy thud of a falling
body. I turned around. The dog lay on the floor. His teeth were bared and
blood trickled from his mouth. His body shook, and then he lay still.
    ‘They’re fighting!’ cried the innkeeper from the other room. ‘Fighting,
oh, dear God!’
    ‘Shut up!’ I yelled. ‘Get in here! I need help.’
    He appeared in nothing but his white nightshirt, carrying a thick candle in
a silver candlestick. His eyes were filled with terror.
    ‘Hold him,’ I said to the innkeeper. ‘I’m going to try to put this spoon in
his mouth or he might bite off his tongue. It’s the falling sickness.’
    The innkeeper grabbed him by the shoulders and pressed him down. I
thrust the spoon into the officer’s mouth and turned it sideways. He bit
down so hard on it I thought his jaw had snapped.
    ‘Sir, you have blood on your back,’ the innkeeper said in a gentle voice.
   ‘It was the dog. It jumped up and bit me. I shot it.’
   ‘Oh, what a world!’ the innkeeper cried. ‘Just look what we’ve done to
each other!’
   All of a sudden, the officer went limp and quiet. The attack had passed.
   ‘He’ll sleep for a few hours now,’ I said. ‘We’ve got to get the dog out of
here.’
   The innkeeper picked up the bulldog and buried it in the garden. Dvoira,
a thin woman with a kind, meek face, came in. I unpacked my first aid kit
and she cleaned and then bandaged the wounds on my neck. I told the
innkeeper I didn’t want to see the officer when he woke up so I would be
leaving as soon as it was light.
   ‘Right you are!’ he said. ‘He’ll be sad, and you’ll feel bad, even though
it’s nobody’s fault. Come and sit with us. Dvoira, light the samovar. Have a
cup of tea for the road.’
   After I had drunk about half a cup of their thick tea, Dvoira said: ‘Just
imagine! Another minute and he’d have strangled you. I’m shaking just
thinking about it.’
   My neck hurt. I could hardly turn my head.
   ‘Life isn’t what it once was,’ said the innkeeper with a sigh. ‘And a
kopeck isn’t either. Now it’s worthless. If only you could have visited
before the war. Every day had a sense of order to it, every day brought with
it its own pleasures. I would open up the inn early in the morning, and
wagons would roll in with kind people – some on their way to the market,
others to the mill. I knew them all for fifty versts around. They came to the
inn to eat and drink – some tea, others horilka. And it made us happy to
watch folks enjoy our plain, wholesome food – bread and onions, or
sausage and tomatoes. They chatted happily, about prices, about the harvest,
about the quality of the flour, about potatoes and hay, and I don’t know
what else – everything under the sun! It was a quiet, peaceful time that
made your soul feel good. I never had to chase after every last kopeck, as
long as I had enough to live on and a bit left over to pay off the local police
inspector. I had one wish – an education for my children. Well, you could
say they’re getting one now, as soldiers in the army. It’s all gone to ruin.
Everything’s ruined, our entire lives.’
   It began to get light. Thick mist covered the ground. It made the trees
look taller than they were. The mist foretold a fine, clear day. I said
goodbye to them. The innkeeper asked me to leave a note for the officer. I
wrote: ‘I’m sorry, but I had to shoot your dog.’
   The sun came up when I was a couple of versts past the village.
Everything shone with dew. In the distance, the rust-brown woods, lit by the
early light, seemed to be smouldering darkly. The air on the land was
unusually sharp and clear, as though it had been locked up for a long time
and only now given its freedom.
   I pulled up my horse, took Lëlya’s ring out of my knapsack and put it on
my little finger. It felt warm on my hand. I caught up with my unit in the
village of Zamirie, near Nesvizh.


1   Final lines of Blok’s ‘For you, there is no name, my distant one’ (1906).

                                OceanofPDF.com
62
A Dank Winter



In October there was a lull in the fighting. Our unit found itself in Zamirie,
not far from the Baranovichi–Minsk railway line. I had never seen a more
dismal village in my life. Low, tumble-down huts, flat, naked fields, and not
a tree in sight.
   Adding to this depressing picture was our transport corps – muddy carts,
mangy horses and soldiers who by now had lost all spit and polish. Their
shabby, fake sheepskin hats were in tatters, the earflaps sticking out like the
wings of a shot bird, their quilted jackets were shiny with grease, their
greatcoats held together with string, and a ragged, wet cigarette butt stuck
to the lips of every other man.
   Autumn arrived late, black and devoid of light. Thick condensation clung
to the windows of our hut. It would build up and then pour down in streams
so that we couldn’t see a thing outside. The wind howled at our door. The
carts sank into the oozing mud, and we brought it inside with us on our
boots. The conditions were miserable. Romanin and I had soon had enough.
We scrubbed the floors and cleaned up the hut as best we could and didn’t
allow anyone in except on business.
   When I returned to the unit Romanin gave me a big hug as if there had
never been anything wrong between us. Evidently, he had just been
overtired. Turning away to hide his tears, he called me a swine and said I
had caused him to go grey. With that he pointed to a grey streak of hair as
proof. He had always had it, but, in all fairness, it was whiter and larger
than before. I told him that Lëlya had died. He sat listening at the table and
blew his nose a few times, and his eyes reddened. I tried not to look at him.
He got up and went out. When he returned he was quiet, and drunk. He had
never done such a thing before.
   Gronsky was gone by the time I arrived. He had had a nervous
breakdown and had to be taken to Minsk. He had been replaced by Kedrin,
a lawyer and prominent member of the Kadet Party.1 Kedrin was a little old
man with a silver imperial and imposing spectacles. In his grey fur jacket,
he reminded one of a large, well-educated rat, and so he became known as
‘the Honourable Mr Rat’. Polite, boring, unbelievably naïve in military
matters, ignorant of village life, and of life in general, he busied himself
with writing political commentaries and ‘analyses of the developing
situation’ and basically stuck out amid the rapidly disintegrating army like a
sore thumb.
   There were few refugees anymore, most of them having settled in the
surrounding villages. Since we had nothing to do, Romanin decided to build
a public banya there in Zamirie. Slowly more and more people, all of them
out of work, were drawn into the project. It became a major undertaking.
Officials, technicians, army engineers and experts on banya construction
and heating systems from Minsk and even Moscow started to arrive.
Romanin quarrelled with all of them. There were angry rows, and he even
sent a few of them packing.
   Crawling with lice, the troops waited for the opening of the banya as for
a miracle. To them Romanin was a saintly father figure. Even the transport
soldiers saluted him and acknowledged his authority. Kedrin gave a number
of speeches, always eloquent and at times even lofty, devoted to the
construction of the banya over our evening tea. He not only addressed the
deeper philosophical justifications for the banya but explained how steam
baths formed one of the basic principles of the Kadet Party’s progressive
politics that would in the end bring happiness to our long-suffering ‘Mother
Russia’. Kedrin sprinkled his speeches with famous quotations and names,
including Tuhan-Baranovskyi, Struve and even Lassalle.2 Romanin liked to
joke how Kedrin’s speeches were worthy of being delivered in front of the
Imperial State Duma. Indeed, old Kadet Kedrin provided us with plenty of
material for jokes. He didn’t take our teasing well and became terribly upset
over every little jest.
   One day a red-bearded man appeared in our hut. He had his greatcoat
slung over his shoulders and a sheepskin hat that clung, as if by a miracle,
to the back of his head. He had a loud but pleasant voice and eyes full of
laughter. He presented himself as a specialist in banyas and delousing. No
one knew his surname, so everyone just called him ‘Redbeard’.
   He had burst into our hut and made himself at home, and from that
moment the business of the banya took an unexpected turn. Conversations
began about all manner of subjects, ranging from the possibility of
constructing Roman baths to recollections of Moscow’s Sandunovskie
banyas, the hot springs of Tiflis, the superlative description of them by
Pushkin, Pushkin’s prose, prose in general – what Redbeard called the ‘God
of the Arts’ – the question of whether Pushkin or Lermontov was the better
prose writer, the plan for War and Peace (supposedly Tolstoy had been
handed Lermontov’s own early rough drafts of the novel), Tolstoy’s funeral
at Yasnaya Polyana, Anna Karenina, Levin shooting snipe, shooting in
general, and Chekhov’s The Seagull. Eventually it emerged that Redbeard
had visited Chekhov at Yalta and produced some of his plays at various
provincial theatres, that he was fluent in French, and that he didn’t know the
first thing about constructing a banya.
   We failed miserably in trying to discover his profession. Whenever we
asked him, he would respond with some lines by the poet Maximilian
Voloshin. According to Redbeard, these verses perfectly captured the
essence of his life:

       Exiles, wanderers and poets,
       Hungry for life, yet failures at living.
       The beast has its dark lair, the bird its nest,
       Yet for us, just a staff, penury and no rest.

   Within two days of his arrival, we could not understand how we had
managed to survive in God-forsaken Zamirie without him.
   Redbeard took Kedrin for an utter nobody. When Kedrin started on one
of his numbing monologues, thus putting an end to our conversations,
Redbeard would turn to him and say with a good-natured smile: ‘Hold on
there, old man! It’s not your turn, but we’ll let you know when it is.’
   Sometimes, usually at night, our conversations turned to matters of
burning importance. We talked of revolution. Romanin was drawn to the
Socialist Revolutionaries – the SRs – Kedrin droned on and on about the
Kadets in the manner of some tedious professor, and Redbeard responded
by saying the workers’ revolution was going to send both of them to hell.
More and more often were heard the words ‘International’ and ‘Lenin’.
   When Redbeard spoke, everyone was quiet. It was as if you could hear
the roar of the crowds, the roar of the revolution itself sweeping over Russia
and wiping it clean. Not even Kedrin interrupted Redbeard. He just sat there
polishing his spectacles with shaky hands, shrugging his shoulders and
snorting violently. This was the most extreme form of protest he permitted
himself, along with the frequent refrain of ‘I beg your pardon!’ He liked to
say this in a haughty and defiant tone. But this was as far as Kedrin would
usually go before he withdrew to bed, muttering something under his
breath, carefully folding his Zemgor uniform and placing it neatly on a
chair.3
   One day, however, when a nurse known as the ‘Black-Eyed Beauty’
came to visit from a neighbouring medical unit, Kedrin revealed himself as
an incorrigible Don Juan. He dug a bottle of Coty perfume from Paris out of
his suitcase and presented it to her. The nurse made eyes at him and giggled
with delight. He minced about her, rubbing his hands, until Redbeard raised
his voice: ‘Calm down, old man! We’ll let you know when it’s your turn.’
   After the February Revolution Kedrin served for a time as a commissar
in the Provisional Government on the western front. It’s easy to imagine all
the insipid and nauseating speeches he made in front of the soldiers. Kedrin
was lucky they didn’t kill him.
   I visited a lot of small towns and villages that winter, either on horseback
or by train. Romanin was always sending me off to gather building material
for the banya, first to Nesvizh, then to Mir, Slutsk and Minsk. Belorussia at
the time looked like an old landscape you might see hanging on the wall of
a fly-blown buffet in some railway station near the front. Traces of the past
were visible everywhere, but they were nothing more than a façade – the
contents had disappeared.
   I saw the great houses of the Polish aristocracy – Prince Radziwiłł’s in
Nesvizh was particularly sumptuous – the nobles’ folwarks, the picturesque
though cramped and rundown Jewish villages, the old synagogues and the
Gothic churches which, amid the stunted woods and bogs, looked like
foreign visitors. I saw the black and white striped verst markers still
standing from the time of Nicholas I.
   But the magnates and their glittering, reckless lives were no more, gone
along with their obedient serfs, gone with the home-grown rabbi-
philosophers and their terrifying warnings about the Day of Judgment that
once reverberated in the synagogues, gone with the rotting banners of the
‘First Rebellion’ that had hung over the altars of the Catholic churches.4
True, the older Jews of Nesvizh could still tell stories about the luxurious
pleasures of the Radziwiłłs, about how their thousands of serfs used to stand
at attention with torches along the road all the way to the Russian frontier
when the prince rode out to meet his lover, the English adventurer Miss
Kingston; about the roisterous hunts and feasts, about the swagger,
arrogance and petty tyranny that counted in those days as the hallmark of
Polish nobility. But their stories were now all second-hand.
   The war was busy erasing what remained of that old way of life together
with any dim memories of it. The war trampled on it, drove it into hiding,
drowned it out with its rough cursing and the lazy grunt of its guns, which
fired even in winter, as if just to clear their throats. But through all the
confusion and turmoil of wartime, the features of a new, transitional era
could already be seen, and people felt tense and anxious as at the slow
approach of a thunderstorm. It was a dank winter. The snow fell and then
melted. For weeks on end, dirty, mushy slush covered the ground. Damp,
persistent winds blew from Poland, scratching at the wet straw covering the
Belorussian huts.
   I loved my travels because I liked being alone. I still couldn’t move past
the memories and feeling of alienation that had gripped me since the
previous autumn. Daily life had begun to blur Lëlya’s image. I was terrified
to notice I was having trouble remembering the sound of her voice. During
those journeys I subjected myself to all manner of hardships and privations
with an obstinacy I still can’t explain: I let myself be drenched by snow and
sleet, I froze to the bone, I slept in barns or on the ground out in the open, I
ate practically nothing and just smoked one damp, harsh cigarette after
another. The slightest thing set my nerves on edge and filled me with
feelings of grief and confusion.
   This happened to me in Molodechno. I had spent the night in an empty,
unheated third-class carriage in a station siding. I awoke at dawn. It was one
of those cold, miserly dawns that come to drive away an equally miserly
night. Winter belongs to the night; the days are but its poor relations who do
their best to stay out of the way.
   Lying under my greatcoat on a wooden bench, I managed to feel a bit of
warmth. A bugle sounded somewhere down the tracks. There must have
been a troop train at the station. The bugle made a plaintive, ringing sound.
I shook inside, and suddenly, listening to the cry of the bugle, I realised the
utter helplessness of my world, the utter pointlessness of my unsettled,
miserable and lonely life. I thought of Mama, of my brothers off fighting on
some neighbouring front, of Lëlya and of how the heart turns hard when
deprived of care and human tenderness.
   Why did I feel so lost and abandoned? I wanted to know. Evidently it was
because we had been raised on books, on misty poetry and lofty ideas, and
the narod – the Russian masses – had marched right past us, not only
indifferent but completely unaware of our existence, the sons and
supporters it had no need of.

                                      •

In early December while riding back to Zamirie on one of my trips, I lost
my way and ended up on a road near the front line. It was a gloomy
evening. The road was covered in ice. My horse picked his way, trying not
to fall. Soon it grew so dark I couldn’t even make out the bushes along the
roadside.
   I heard a distant rumbling up ahead. My horse hesitated and then began
to prance. I listened and then recognised the familiar clatter of an artillery
convoy on the move. Even though they were still far off, I carefully turned
my horse to the side of the road: the recklessness of transport drivers was
well known to everyone. Suddenly, there came a thin whine. Ahead on the
road I saw the faint flash of an explosion. Then another, and another. The
Germans were shelling the road. In between the explosions I could hear the
convoy racing towards me at a gallop. The usual panic must have broken
out. A shell burst next to me. I didn’t even notice it, but something had
happened to my left leg. It had turned to cotton wool.
   I quickly reached down to my boot and my fingers came in contact with
something sticky and warm. Raising my arm, I felt a shooting pain as
though my leg was being split in two. I grabbed for the pommel of my
saddle but couldn’t hold on and dropped onto the road. I must have fallen
on my wounded leg, for I lost consciousness for a moment.
   When I came to, the furious thunder of the transport was upon me. I
grabbed a stirrup and shouted at my horse, who, snorting and shivering,
cautiously pulled me off the road and into the ditch. I lay there, clutching a
stirrup, while right in front of my face the convoy roared past, the drivers
yelling and whistling, the terrified horses snorting, the metal wheels
crashing over the icy road. I felt as if it would never end.
   And then everything was quiet. My horse sniffed me up and down and
whinnied nervously. I took me a good five minutes to dig my electric torch
out of my pocket and turn it on. I don’t remember a thing after that. It seems
I passed out again, and the torch lay there shining at my side.
   Some soldiers from the signal corps riding by in a two-wheeled cart saw
the light. They picked me up, bandaged me as best they could and took me
to the field hospital in Nesvizh. I stayed in hospital for almost a month. It
was a light wound, and the bone had not even been grazed. I was the only
one in the ward; there were no other wounded. Romanin came to visit often.
The banya was about to open, and he was beaming. Kedrin, the Honourable
Mr Rat, visited me twice. His eyes twitching, his silver imperial shaking
with fear and indignation, he told me all about Rasputin and the ‘moral
degradation of the Imperial Court’. At the time Nicholas II was making an
inspection tour of the western front. He came to Zamirie. The order went
out to tidy up the village before his arrival. This consisted of bringing in
from the closest forest a great many fir trees and propping them up as
camouflage in front of the most dilapidated hovels.
   I read a great deal while recovering. The Scandinavians – Ibsen,
Strindberg, Hamsun, Bang – were all the rage then. I read Ibsen – that great
manual labourer of the human soul. Then I came across Muratov’s Images
of Italy,5 and I lost myself in the faintly bitter air of the country’s museums
and churches. I imagined I could see the high hills of Perugia, smudged by
a light blue haze and softly radiant in the sun. I began reading Leonid
Andreev’s Life of a Man but put it aside for Chekhov’s pure and direct The
Steppe.
   I was homesick for Russia. I kept thinking about the Bryansk forest,
which I remembered as the happiest, most blessed place on earth. I could
see its wooded ravines, its rivers and its patches of felled timber now home
to young pine and birch, crimson willow-herb, and the white hats of the
meadow rue. This was a golden land of peace and calm. I was desperate for
such peace, and the realisation I might never know it again brought me
close to tears.
   Before long I was up and about on crutches and was even allowed to go
into the village. I hobbled off to see a local watchmaker I knew. Surrounded
by quietly ticking watches covering the four walls, a bunch of bright
geraniums perched upon the windowsill, the watchmaker, his loupe screwed
in place, filled me in on the local news.
   I was given newspapers and magazines to read, most often Little Fire. I
would look at the monotonous battle drawings by the artist Svarog6 and the
endless photographs of officers killed at the front. The newspapers were full
of vague rumours and suggestions about Nicholas and Alix, Rasputin and
Goremykin;7 the black shadow of the raven’s wing was falling over Russia.
Romanin often sent me small parcels of food – cheese, sausage, sugar –
wrapped in newspaper.
   With nothing better to do one day, I picked up a paper, crumpled and
covered in greasy cheese stains, and began to read. Looking through the list
of casualties from the front I saw written: ‘Killed on the Galician front,
Lieutenant Boris Georgievich Paustovsky, Sappers’ Battalion,’ and a little
farther down the page: ‘Killed in action near Riga, Ensign Vadim
Georgievich Paustovsky, Navaginsky Infantry Regiment.’
   Both my brothers killed on the very same day. Even though I was still
quite weak, the hospital’s chief doctor released me. I was put in a cart and
taken to Zamirie. That evening I left for Moscow to see Mama.


1The Constitutional Democratic Party (known as the Kadets) was a liberal
political party composed chiefly of professionals and the educated elite.
Yevgeny Kedrin (1851–1921), lawyer and political figure, later emigrated.
2  Mykhailo Tuhan-Baranovskyi (1865–1919), Ukrainian economist,
professor and political figure; Pëtr Struve (1870–1944), political economist
and Marxist, later critic of the Soviet state; Ferdinand Lassalle (1825–64),
German philosopher, socialist organiser and activist.
3 Zemgor was an acronym for the United Committee for the Union of
Zemstvos and Towns, created in 1915 to assist the government in the war
effort.
4   A reference to the Polish uprising against Russian rule in 1830–31.
5 Pavel Muratov (1881–1950), art historian, critic, author of three-volume
Images of Italy.
6   Vasily Svarog (born Korochkin) (1883–1946), Russian-Soviet painter.
7   Ivan Goremykin (1839–1917), prime minister of Russia 1914–16.
OceanofPDF.com
63
A Grievous Commotion



Mama had completely shrivelled up and grown shorter. Her face still wore
her old wounded expression of repressed grief which no one could
understand. I arrived a month after the death of my brothers. Mama rarely
cried. She never had been given to tears. Galya shook whenever she talked
of our brothers, but only if Mama wasn’t present. She held herself together
when she was.
   By then I had seen enough human grief to realise that people almost
always look for ways to lighten it. This came most naturally to the old who
believed in a reunion after death and a blessed hereafter for the souls of the
departed. What else was there? Memories, friends, nature, knowledge of the
fact that the deceased is remembered fondly, concern for those dear ones
who are left behind.
   Mama and Galya’s grief was restrained, locked away. They had to go on
living. Mama had to live for Galya, and Galya so that Mama could go on
looking after her. I didn’t know how to help. I, too, had been utterly crushed
by the death of both my brothers at the same time. We had had little in
common. We were all quite different, but this merely intensified the sorrow
I felt for them, now no longer among the living.
   Relief came quite by accident. I asked Galya what she and Mama knew
about the circumstances of our brothers’ deaths. It turned out that they knew
nothing.
   ‘We need to find out.’
   ‘How?’ asked Galya.
   ‘Write to their regimental commanders. Find their army mates, those who
were with them the day they died. Request their letters, diaries, any
documents they might have left behind.’
   I never could have imagined the effect my words would have. Life now
had a purpose. There was a job to do.
   Galya told this to Mama, and the very next day saw the start of a
tenacious and feverish effort that refused to acknowledge any obstacles.
The two of them wrote letters to the front. They relentlessly hunted down
Dima’s and Borya’s comrades, even those who were in hospital or had been
invalided out. They discovered the names of the soldiers under their
command. They sent requests for information everywhere. At the same
time, Mama began to seek my brothers’ pensions. Replies began to arrive.
Mama and Galya now began to spend most of their time discussing them,
piecing the facts together surrounding my brothers’ deaths, and writing
responses for further, clarifying details. It turned out that Dima had kept a
diary – just a few pages of scribbled notes. Mama and Galya spent whole
days trying to decipher his handwriting.
   Many people were drawn into their correspondence. Each one of them
made casual references to the circumstances of their own lives, and so new
acquaintances, blessed by the memory of my brothers, were made by post.
Mama and Galya took a genuine interest in the lives of their new
acquaintances. Mama, who had had a long habit of, as she liked to say,
instructing others ‘how to act honestly and correctly’, wrote them long
letters full of advice and suggestions, complete with examples from her
own experience. For me it was both touching and sad to see this unhappy
old woman, her own life in ruins, teaching others how they ought to live.
Thus her sorrow gradually dissolved into the lives of others; it faded thanks
to feverish activity and this grievous commotion. This made me happy even
though I knew it could not go on like this forever. I worried what might
follow.
   My Aunt Vera Grigorievna, who lived in Kiev, had a small, wooded
estate called Kopan on the river Pripyat. She had long been concerned by
the fact that the estate was rarely used and no one was looking after it. More
than once she had suggested to Mama that she should go and live at Kopan
with Galya, but Mama had always declined since she had to stay in
Moscow with Dima and Galya. Now, when Aunt Vera invited Mama once
more, she readily accepted.
   The decision had been made to leave in early spring. From that very
minute Mama found some peace of mind and even cheered up. A bit of
light had begun to shine. Mama had already started making plans to revive
the estate and with only modest investments make it so prosperous that
‘muddle-headed Aunt Vera would never dream it could have been possible’.
Mama was not worried about me. I overheard her talking to Galya.
   ‘Why doesn’t Kostik worry as much as we do?’
   ‘He’s had a different life,’ said Mama. ‘He’s travelled a good deal, seen
lots of things, and met all sorts of people. He has so many different
interests. He’s a born vagabond! Like your father.’
   There was, of course, a touch of disapproval in Mama’s comment. My
father’s inability to stay in one place, in her opinion, had been the cause of
our family’s impoverishment and ruin. Only one thing existed in this world
for Mama – duty. Duty and nothing else. The fulfilment of self-imposed
duties was the only happiness she had ever known. My father, on the other
hand, had been ‘greedy for life’, as Mama used to say. To her, only selfish
people were capable of such a thing. Such was Mama’s philosophy of life in
her old age.
   The Union of Cities had given me two months’ convalescent leave. I was
to return to the unit in March. Meanwhile, the union offered me a job
shipping medicines and food from Moscow to the front. This meant
additional pay, and so I accepted. We needed to save some money for
Mama’s trip to Kopan.
   My work involved hiring draymen, collecting medicines and other
supplies from a number of depots, and delivering them to the goods stations
for shipment to the units of the Union of Cities. Every morning I went to
Varvarskaya Square, where the draymen waited to be hired. Strict rules
governed the process. No one was allowed to negotiate with any of the
draymen individually. You could get beaten up for that. Huge, bearded
peasants in heavy sheepskin coats over which they wore canvas aprons, the
draymen stood waiting in a crowd on the square, joking and swearing like
mad. They had to stand within sight of the foreman, who made sure no one
tried to make a deal on the side and undercut the cooperative.
   You had to walk through flocks of well-fed pigeons filling the square to
reach the draymen. As soon as a customer appeared, the foreman whipped
off his hat and passed it around so that each drayman could toss in his
bronze number badge. Shaking the badges in his hat, the foreman then
approached the customer, who pulled out as many badges as he needed
carts. This lottery was preceded by furious bargaining, even though the
rates for carrying and loading had been established by decades of tradition
and were known to everyone.
   After a month I knew nearly all the goods stations, depots and
storehouses of Moscow. This was an enormous and little-known world with
its own laws and customs. I got the impression that everyone stole –
storehouse managers, watchmen, porters and especially the station clerks
who weighed the goods. The draymen stole openly, and every time they
were caught, they resorted to a well-tested response: they would start a fight
amid a storm of overwhelming curses. Few people wanted to tangle with
these raging giants, especially since they were duty bound to back each
other up. Everything was stolen, from rusty old nails to bits of sacking.
   This is what was happening down at the bottom. One could only guess
what was happening up at the top. Everything dark, petty and grasping had
been excited to the point of hysteria by the example of Rasputin. His name
was on everyone’s lips. The horse thief of Tobolsk, the peasant with the
lecherous eyes sat on the Russian throne and ruled over the country.
‘What’s Grishka Rasputin got that we haven’t?’ the draymen laughed,
leering and whistling at the women passing by. ‘Grab while the going’s
good, boys! It’ll soon be all gone! Grigory Yefimovich will back us up. We
know how the old hypocrite does it, out stealing horses and the like.’
   This band of thieves had only one holy and unbreakable rule: fair shares.
Share the loot with each and every one who helped to steal it: give him his
‘lawful’ portion.
   And the depots! I saw huge vaults stuffed with materiel for the army: hats
that came apart in your hands, worthless greatcoats made of canvas, caps
with broken peaks and badges that had already lost their shape, boots with
rotten soles, undergarments made of calico that was so rough and full of
sharp awns they would bloody men’s bodies. All this was sewn up in fresh-
smelling new sacking and sent to the front. The sacking was, in fact, the
only sound material in this pile of shoddy junk.
   I couldn’t wait to get back to my unit. Distance had turned it into a
comforting home. It seemed as though everything good and decent was
there at the front, while here all was rotten.
   Winter that year in Moscow, with its frequent thaws and dirty snow, its
freezing drizzle, its black ice, reflected my feelings. The ice on the ponds in
the Zoological Garden had melted. On one of them some sort of water bird
let out a shrill cry: ‘What’s happened? Oh my God, what’s happened,
what’s happened?’ We could hear it clearly from inside our flat.
   I worked only half the day, came home early, had a meagre supper and
retired to my cubbyhole of a room. Mama and Galya were busy sewing in
preparation for the trip. The sewing machine chattered away until late into
the night. The floor was littered with fabric scraps and bits of thread. I sat
and wrote. About the war, about my generation. I was certain we would
remake the world. We were a generation of restless dreamers and idealists. I
naïvely believed that these qualities meant we would not allow ourselves to
lead humdrum lives and die without having accomplished something,
leaving nothing behind, as Romanin liked to say, ‘but our smell’.
   Yet despite this certainty, I saw ever more clearly that alongside this
generation of intelligènty and men and women who, imagining they
belonged to no class, considered themselves to be the ‘salt of the earth’,
there was the enormous mass of the narod, those millions of Russians who
called themselves ‘brother workers’, who were living their own intense
lives about which I knew almost nothing. These people possessed an
undeniable life force, an intolerant, sober sense of right and wrong, born of
the burdens carried on their backs. Their truth could not be charmed away
by the melodic sounds of verse, no matter how beautiful, or obscured by the
mists of Bergson’s fashionable philosophy. I sensed the omnipresence of
this truth, as though being watched by an insistent and intense pair of eyes.
It became unmistakably clear to me that it was impossible to live and work
honestly in Russia without first determining one’s attitude to the working
class, its struggle and its aspirations.
   I began to write a story about a young man of my generation. I wrote it
slowly over a long time. It followed me through the years of the revolution
and civil war and began to ripen. I finally published it as The Romantics,
but only much later in the ’thirties. I also wrote a few poems around this
time and sent them to a famous poet. I had no hope he would respond, but
he did. He sent me a postcard. In big, bold letters he wrote: ‘You live like an
actor delivering his lines from off stage.’ That was all.
   At the time I was leading a double life – one real, the other make-believe.
This book is about the real one. My make-believe life existed independently
and gave my real life all the things that it inevitably lacked – everything I
held to be beautiful and alluring. My imaginary life was spent travelling the
world, meeting fascinating people, taking part in important events. It was
swathed in the mantle of love. And it was, in reality, one long, coherent
dream.
   Of course, now I can look back on my life at that age with a patronising
smile. That’s easy. All of us, wise from experience, feel we are entitled to
such an attitude. Or at least that’s how sober, mature people think who
believe they alone are engaged in the serious business of life. But in the end
they don’t have a right to this smile. They don’t have the right to laugh at
the dreams of the young – dreams that sowed the first seeds of poetry in
many a soul. These dreams possessed a purity and a nobility that have left
their traces upon the whole of their lives. Everyone who enjoyed these gifts
in their youth can agree with me in the knowledge that they once possessed
inexhaustible treasures.
   The world was ours. Neither time nor space had any limits. We could
breathe the mushroom-scented air of the taiga one minute and that of the
Parisian boulevards at dawn the next. We could talk to Hugo or Lermontov,
Peter the Great or Garibaldi. We could declare our love to a seventeen-year-
old girl in her brown school uniform as she nervously fidgeted with her
pigtail or just as easily prostrate ourselves at the feet of Isolde. We could
live with Miklukho-Maklai in the jungles of New Guinea, gallop with
Pushkin to Erzurum, serve in the National Convention, cut the first paths
through the wilds of Florida, languish in debtors’ prison with Little Dorrit’s
father, or sail to England with the ashes of Byron. There were no borders in
that world, and I have yet to meet the cynic who could honestly deny its
value or its influence on our thoughts and actions.
   This is what I wrote about. I wrote on a wide windowsill because I had
no desk. I often stopped to look out of the window and gaze at the snow-
covered lime trees in the Zoological Garden. I could hear the sad,
unanswered cry of that bird on the lake: ‘What’s happened? Oh my God,
what’s happened?’ As I was writing I received a letter from the Union of
Cities. I had been summoned by its director, the prominent Kadet
Shchepkin.1 I went to see Shchepkin the next morning. The union’s offices
were in a large building next to the Moscow Arts Theatre. I was met by a
small, elderly, amiable-looking man. He was wearing a displeased
expression. ‘Well, my dear young man,’ he said, ‘I’m afraid I have some
most unpleasant news for you.’
   His words were straight from Gogol’s Inspector General, and it was
evident that he was pleased with himself, for he cleared his throat, waved
his pudgy hands in the air and repeated them: ‘Most unpleasant news!
During your time in Zamirie with one of our hospital trains the emperor
paid a visit.’
    ‘Yes,’ I said, ‘that is correct.’
    ‘Yes,’ Shchepkin replied, ‘and something else is correct. Namely, that
one of the members of the unit described the emperor’s visit to Zamirie in a
rather satirical fashion. He wrote this in a letter to a friend, having
forgotten, no doubt due to his youth and inexperience, about the military
censorship. Does this also sound correct?’
    ‘Yes,’ I answered, ‘that is correct.’ While I had been in hospital in
Nesvizh I had heard a great deal about the emperor’s visit and wrote about
it in a letter to an old schoolmate in Kiev.
    ‘And we now know it is correct’, Shchepkin continued, ‘that the military
censor opened this letter. The signature was illegible, but because the
envelope bore the stamp of your unit, the censor entrusted the matter to us
to discover the identity of the man who wrote this letter and forbid him
from returning to the front. Is this your letter?’ He showed me the letter.
    ‘Yes.’
    ‘You’ve got off lightly,’ said Shchepkin. ‘From what I hear we are losing
a good worker, but there’s nothing to be done about it. I’ll ask you to turn in
your papers at once and collect what’s still owed you.’
    I had been so intent on getting back to my unit, and this came as a harsh
and devastating blow. I didn’t go home but walked over to the Tretyakov
Gallery. It was empty. The old women attendants dozed in their corners. A
warm draught emanated from the radiators. I sat down in front of
Flavitsky’s Princess Tarakanova.2 I stared at it for a long time, over an
hour. I stared because the woman in the painting looked like Lëlya. I didn’t
want to go home. Now I finally realised that I had no home to go to.


1 Dmitry Shchepkin (1879–1937), lawyer, economist, political figure,
executed under Stalin.
2 Konstantin Flavitsky’s (1830–66) best-known painting, which depicts the
legendary death of the eighteenth-century pretender to the Russian throne
(1864).

                              OceanofPDF.com
64
The Suburb of Chechelevka



In February Mama and Galya left for Kiev. I stayed in Moscow, hoping to
find a job. Just then Uncle Kolya, an artillery engineer, was transferred from
Bryansk to Moscow and attached to the French military mission. The
mission had been sent to Russia to organise the manufacture of high-
explosive grenades. Aunt Marusya joined Uncle Kolya in Moscow. They
were given a government flat in a little building on 1st Meshchanskaya
Street.
   French artillerists from the mission often dined at their flat. I was invited
to a few of these meals and liked to observe the Frenchmen. Their light blue
uniforms smelled of eau-de-Cologne. Most of the officers brought Aunt
Marusya flowers, and they were to a man exceedingly courteous. But
beneath the charm and exquisite manners, I caught a whiff of Dumas’s The
Three Musketeers.
   This was most apparent after some Russian vodka. They joked and
roared with laughter, the noise grew louder, and then they all broke into a
song about a station master. The song, a favourite of French railway
passengers, had been composed with the sole intent of driving station
masters mad with rage. As the station master came out onto the platform to
see the train off, the passengers would line up at their open windows and
begin to sing in time with the rhythm of the wheels – first slowly and then
faster and faster – as they bowed in unison like Chinese puppets. ‘Il est
cocu, le chef de gare. Il est cocu, le chef de gare,’ went the song over and
over. ‘He’s a cuckold, the station master. He’s a cuckold, the station master.’
   The officers mimicked the scene. Their old colonel, who had a little
yellow beard, was particularly funny as the station master.
   Sometimes the officers quarrelled, and you could almost smell
gunpowder in the air of Uncle Kolya’s small dining room and imagine the
men reaching for their swords. Eyes flashed, thin moustaches twitched,
insults flew across the table, until finally the colonel raised a hand in his
fine tailored shirt. In an instant, everyone fell silent.
    According to Uncle Kolya, the officers were knowledgeable engineers.
The colonel was considered one of France’s leading metallurgists and had
written several books on the subject. Uncle Kolya had connections at a
number of metallurgical works. I asked him if he could get me a job as a
factory hand somewhere. He was not in the least surprised by my request
and found a position for me as an inspector of shell casings at the Bryansk
Works in Yekaterinoslav.
    But first I was required to get some training at a factory in Moscow on
inspection methods and the working of hydraulic presses. Casings in those
days were made on such presses. I was sent to the Gustav List Works on the
Sofiiskaya Embankment. I began by learning to read blueprints – smudgy
drawings of the component parts of hydraulic presses on pages of blue
paper. You could go blind trying to read them. I was also taught how to use
sophisticated measuring instruments to inspect the quality of casings and
fuses.
    I returned home from the works to our deserted flat. Mama had sold the
little furniture we had, and it was now empty as a barn. All that remained
was a camp bed and a chair. I liked the solitude. No one interrupted my
reading until all hours of the night. I was free to smoke and think. I thought
about all the books I knew I just had to write. I ended up writing completely
different books, but that’s another matter.
    Soon I left Moscow. I boarded the wrong train and had to get off at
Rzhava, south of Kursk. I sat here for a few hours waiting for my train,
which was running late. The wait didn’t bother me. I enjoyed sitting in the
third-class waiting room, reading the timetables, listening to the bells and
punctuated tapping of the telegraph machine, and going out onto the
platform to watch the express trains rush through. They went so fast the
small station shook. I walked around in the nearby fields. Spring had
already arrived here. The snowbanks had shrunk into the ground and those
that remained were riddled with holes like pumice stone. Clouds of
jackdaws circled and cawed. At that moment, and at many since then, I
wanted to walk off into those wet fields of spring and never come back.
    In Yekaterinoslav I rented part of a room in a house in the suburb of
Chechelevka, not far from the Bryansk Works. I was down to my last
twelve roubles. The house belonged to the widowed lathe operator. He lived
with his only child, a 25-year-old daughter named Glasha, who was ill with
tuberculosis. I had rented for myself one corner of the kitchen. A riveter
from the Bryansk Works – a tall fellow with wild eyes – had rented another
corner. I never heard him make a sound. He never once responded to any of
my questions, as if he were stone deaf. Every night he brought back with
him on his way home from the factory a bottle of cloudy Yekaterinoslav
boza, drank it down, passed out in his clothes on his shabby mattress on the
floor, and slept as if dead until the first factory whistle blew in the morning.
   Our landlord had a black moustache and talked almost as little as the
riveter. He was utterly indifferent to us lodgers. Nevertheless, he did once
speak to me: ‘You’re some kind of student, right? You might give me some
sort of book to read. It’d help clear my head.’
   I had no books. He was silent and then said: ‘If Glasha weren’t sick I’d
marry her off. To you. You’ve got some sort of future. I see you up all night
writing. If you two got married, you wouldn’t have to lie about there under
the sink. The tap’s always running, dripping. Can’t imagine you can get
much sleep.’
   He said all this in a bored way, as though just to make conversation,
without really expecting anything to come of it. That night I heard Glasha
tell him off through the door: ‘Why do you have to bother every lodger with
your nonsense? You’re always trying to pawn me off on someone. I’m not
some lazy mouth you have to feed. I’m the one doing all the work around
here.’
   ‘You goose,’ said her father unperturbed, almost tenderly. ‘You broody
hen, you! It’s your happiness I’m thinking of. You can’t spend your whole
life in that little room of yours, staring at the wallpaper.’
   ‘There’s no happiness left for me in this life,’ said Glasha. She burst into
tears. ‘You yourself don’t know why you had me. You can’t bear to think
about it. My life will be over by the spring.’
   Her father left the house in a temper. Having dried her tears, Glasha came
out into the kitchen to ask whether I could give her something to read –
something about undying love. Her face was heavily powdered. The
powder together with the underlying paleness of her face made it look as
though she were wearing a cardboard mask. She reeked of sugary-sweet
perfume. I told her I didn’t have any love stories, certainly none about
undying love.
   ‘Oh, I’m so sick of you lodgers!’ she said.
  She locked herself in her room, wound up her old gramophone and put
on a record of nonsense songs by the popular Moscow clowns Bim and
Bom:

       Lucretia did fry up,
       Some dumplings in a pawnshop,
       While Monna Giovanna did quicken
       To douse with perfume her chicken.

   Often at night Glasha had coughing fits. Gasping, she would say to the
walls: ‘O Lord, if only some kind person would come along and shoot me
like a dog.’ Feeling sorry for her I borrowed a copy of Hugo’s Toilers of the
Sea, the story of the sailor Gilliat’s undying love, from the local library. She
devoured the book in one night. I was lying on my mattress on the floor
reading. The riveter was grinding his teeth in his sleep. Suddenly, the door
to Glasha’s room sprang open and Hugo’s book flew through the air, pages
scattering this way and that, before it smacked onto the floor next to my
mattress.
   ‘Keep it!’ shouted Glasha. ‘Keep your filthy book! It’s poison! I hope
your Frenchman chokes on it. It’s all lies! He lies like a dog! Nothing of the
sort ever happened. It couldn’t! Would I be living like this if such a man
existed? I’d have found him by now if he did, and I’d worship the ground
he walked on.’
   ‘Such men do exist,’ I said. ‘And stop shouting!’
   ‘Shouting, am I? Now there’s a bit of news. What would you rather I do,
sing? How about “Everyone says I’m frivolous, / Everyone says I’ve many
lovers!” Or would you rather I dance the maxixe? I hate you!’ she shouted,
knocking the gramophone off the table. ‘I hate you! I wish I’d never laid
eyes on you! May you burn in hell!’
   She tore off a loose strip of wallpaper. Dust flew. The riveter jumped up
and ran to the sink to wash. He thought he had heard the morning’s first
whistle. Just then the lathe operator came in. He tried to grab Glasha by the
arms, but she broke free, and with blazing eyes and clenched teeth, her skin
a deathly white, she tore at the wallpaper, strip by strip, until the room
looked black and bare, as though it had been turned inside out.
   The soft blue of a spring dawn shone through the window. It all ended
when Glasha began coughing up blood and was taken to the factory
hospital. The lathe operator started to drink. The riveter was unfazed by the
state of the flat or the fate of the landlord and just went on downing his
nightly bottle of boza and sleeping in until his next shift.
   Soon after Glasha’s death the riveter moved out and the flat became
empty. One evening, as I lay alone in the flat on my mattress reading, I
heard a soft but insistent knock at the door. I opened it. It was Bugaenko,
from my workshop at the factory. Normally a quiet, sarcastic sort of fellow,
he was obviously upset.
   ‘Can I come in?’ he said. ‘I need to talk to you.’ He gazed at the bare
black walls and sighed. ‘You’ve had bad luck ending up here. The
landlord’s a fool. You should move.’
   ‘I won’t be staying here in Yekaterinoslav much longer,’ I said. ‘It’s not
worth it.’
   ‘He’s a fool,’ Bugaenko repeated. ‘He’s drowning himself in vodka,
trying to run away from life and his comrades. He’s an embarrassment to
the proletariat. Most of us are stronger than that.’
   ‘I know,’ I said. ‘The workers you’ve got there are among the best.’
   ‘That’s what I wanted to talk to you about. We’ve had our eye on you for
some time now. You must have noticed.’
   ‘But why?’ I asked, nervously.
   ‘We’ve been trying to figure you out,’ replied Bugaenko. He grinned.
‘You have to be careful around others nowadays. It’s hard to know who you
can trust.’
   ‘So, what have you figured out?’
   Bugaenko sat down, lit a cigarette and started talking, almost as if he
were speaking to himself. He said that they had observed me for quite some
time until becoming convinced, in his words, that although I was not part of
the revolutionary movement, nonetheless I was someone with possibilities.
The thing was, they wanted to put out a leaflet attacking the arbitrary nature
of rule in the country, but they had no one to write it. It would be good if I,
clearly an educated man, would write the leaflet for them. They, the
workers, would look it over and then ‘put it into circulation’.
   I said yes. I wrote the leaflet, filling it with as much pathos as I could
muster. I like to think the ghost of Victor Hugo watched over me as I wrote.
   Bugaenko wasn’t pleased. ‘You missed the target,’ he said. ‘It’s good, it’s
well written, polished, but beautiful writing tends to smooth things over, it
calms people down, which is all fine and good, but only when called for.
What we need is clarity. It has to be simple so everyone can understand it,
even the most illiterate. It has to make them angry, so angry that they want
to act. Their hands should ball into hard fists as they read it. I know this
isn’t easy. It’s harder than writing something pretty. Give it another try.’
   I worked hard on it for several nights in a row before I managed to put
down on paper something simple and direct. The leaflet was copied on a
hectograph machine and then pasted on the factory walls and circulated
among the workers. I was proud of my work but, unfortunately, my
authorship had to be kept a secret. I wanted to keep one copy for myself as
a memento, but Bugaenko took it from me, saying I was a lousy
conspirator. Still, he was pleased with the leaflet. Smiling at me through his
trimmed, tobacco-stained moustache and shifting into Ukrainian dialect, he
said: ‘Oh yes, some fine Cossack boys we’ve got here in our little
Zaporozhian troop.’
   My job at the works was to inspect the shell casings. They were stacked
up in piles on trestle tables. I shone a small electric torch into each case,
checking for blisters and overburns. Next I measured the diameter with
callipers. I marked each defective shell with a cross in white chalk. There
were a lot of them. The old women in our crew carted them back to the
smelters.
   I worked next to a large circular saw that cut the metal into pieces. The
shriek it made was unbearable. It sent cold shivers down my spine and set
every single nerve on edge. It bored into my brain like a drill. I thought I
was going deaf and blind from the racket and would have blown that saw
up with a bomb if I could have. A worse assault on one’s brain, heart,
nerves – on one’s entire being – would be hard to imagine. It was even
worse when the saw stopped, because we stood there in terror waiting for it
to start up again. The anticipation made one sick. Within minutes, the saw
howled back into life in triumph and began once again to cut metal with its
savage, whirling teeth amid a fountain of burning red sparks.
   I did not report to the factory boss, but to the representative of the
Artillery Command attached to the Bryansk Works, a Captain Velyaminov,
sent down from Petrograd. I was required to go and see him every three or
four days with an update on my work. For a long time I couldn’t think of
who he reminded me of, until finally it came to me: the Decembrist
Yakubovich.1 Velyaminov had the same lean face, dark drooping moustache
and black bandage over his forehead.
   Velyaminov lived on Bolshoi Avenue. The windows of his room looked
out onto the river Dnieper and the surrounding gardens. The trees were now
in full bud. The barely perceptible greenish haze of early spring hung in the
air. Velyaminov’s room was cluttered with blueprints, books and all sorts of
things that had nothing to do with his work in artillery.
   He had a passion for photography and the local history of Russia’s
forgotten towns and villages. The windowsills were crowded with flasks,
graduated glasses and trays for developing and printing. The room had the
acidic smell of fixing solution. Photographs lay beside a potted
philodendron on a round table covered with a velvet cloth. They were views
of provincial towns – Porkhov, Gdov, Valdai, Loev, Roslavl and many
others. Velayminov found some interesting feature in each of them to
photograph. Smoke curling from the ever-present cigarette in his mouth, he
would tell me in a smug but excited voice about all of his discoveries as he
showed me the photographs. It might be a wooden gate from the era of
Peter the Great, or simply a fancy balustrade on a balcony, sometimes a row
of shops, or maybe a watchtower straight out of Gogol.
   Velyaminov spent every holiday travelling to forgotten, out-of-the-way
places. He visited the decaying country manors of the provincial nobility to
photograph their collections of paintings, exquisite tiled stoves and
sculptures still preserved in their crumbling ballrooms and neglected
gardens, and then took the photographs back to Petrograd with him to show
his friends who were connoisseurs of art. With restrained pride he told me
how he had managed to find the grave of Pushkin’s nanny, Arina
Rodionovna, in the village of Suida near Luga, as well as a bust by the
noted sculptor Kozlovsky2 and two paintings by the French artist Poussin in
a boarded-up mansion near Cherepovets.
   I loved to sit there for hours looking at Velyaminov’s photographs. He
served me tea from a thermos and sausage sandwiches. It was nice and
warm in his cluttered room. I kept putting off leaving for Chechelevka and
the bare kitchen where the rust-coloured cockroaches, practically
transparent from hunger, raced up and down the walls. One day Velyaminov
said: ‘It’s time you stopped moping in that place over in Chechelevka and
going deaf from that saw. I’m sending you to Taganrog. It’s a wonderful
town. Along the way I’m going to have you stop at Yuzovka and look in on
the Novorossiisk Factory so you can show them how they ought to be
inspecting the casings. It shouldn’t take more than a couple of weeks. Does
that sound good to you?’
   Needless to say, I said yes, it did. Before parting, he gave me my pay and
money for the journey and promised to come and see me in Taganrog in the
summer.
   Back in the kitchen at Chechelevka I hardly slept all night. We had to
leave the light on to keep the cockroaches away. In the dark they would
slither out of the walls and crawl all over our faces and hands. As I lay
there, a crazy idea came to me: why not put off going to Yuzovka for five or
six days and use the time to visit Sevastopol? Velyaminov would never
know. I had been to Sevastopol once as a boy on the way from Kiev to
Alushta with my entire family and had never forgotten it. I had often
dreamed about it – a small, picturesque town bathed in the sea’s reflected
light and smelling of seaweed and the smoke of steamships.
   Water dripped from the tap, the cockroaches drank from a small puddle
on the floor, a drunk sobbed and yelled in the street below – ‘Shoot me,
Judas! Stab me in the back!’ – but none of it bothered me. I could already
smell, as I dozed off, the almond-scented air of Sevastopol’s gardens.


1Alexander Yakubovich (1792–1845), among the Decembrists sentenced to
death, later commuted. Pëtr Karatygin’s 1825 portrait of Yakubovich shows
him with a dark bandage over his forehead.
2   Mikhail Kozlovsky (1753–1802), Neoclassical sculptor.

                              OceanofPDF.com
65
One Day



They asked to see my travel permit for Sevastopol in the booking office. I
didn’t have one, so I bought a ticket as far as Bakhchisarai. I was certain I’d
find a way to get to Sevastopol from there. The old clerk felt sorry for me.
‘All these regulations!’ he sighed. ‘And all because of the Empress Maria.’
   The tragic loss of the Empress Maria, the mightiest battleship in the
Black Sea Fleet, was a mystery.1 At the time the whole world was talking
about it. While anchored in Sevastopol’s Northern Bay it suddenly exploded
for no apparent reason and sank. Shortly before the explosion, a number of
‘august personages’, including members of Empress Alexandra
Fëdorovna’s own suite, toured the ship. It was said that one of them must
have placed several little bombs – no bigger than champagne corks – with
timers at key points throughout the vessel. This was not the only such
incident. Ships loaded with arms crossing the Atlantic for Europe also often
exploded or caught fire. Many believed they were being sunk by small
bombs tossed into the coal upon refuelling.
   I stood for a long time in the train’s vestibule looking out of the window.
The southern night was descending, warm and impenetrable. At every stop I
opened the door and stuck my head out to listen. I could hear a faint rustle
coming from the darkness. It must have been the sound of the ground
drying out after the melt of the final snow.
   I regretted every stop and rejoiced at every verst marker that I saw fly
past in the dim light from the carriage window. In those days there was no
electricity on the trains, only candles. The dimly lit carriages were a good
place to imagine one’s future, which in that atmosphere always appeared
alluring and exciting. The other imaginary world, of which I have written,
became startlingly real. I gave myself over to it completely, without the
least bit of remorse. It was too dark to read or write on the train, so what
else was there to do but let my imagination wander? Assuming, of course,
one wasn’t bothered by importunate fellow travellers.
    Luckily, on this particular journey I wasn’t. The only other person in the
vestibule was a young sailor in a black greatcoat. He kept singing the same
song over and over, but just the first few lines before stopping and starting
again. All I can remember are a few words: ‘There was an awful
commotion, at Dzhankoi station . . .’ I never did learn what sort of
commotion it had been, even though we passed through Dzhankoi station in
the early hours of the morning.
    After that, I kept staring out into the dark hoping to catch a glimpse of
the spurs of the Crimean Mountains, but all I could see were the lights of
Simferopol.
    The station platform in Simferopol was empty. It was nearly dawn. A
wind blew from the mountains. The poplars shook their leaves in the station
square. The windows of the station’s buffet were brightly lit. Almond twigs
stood in vases alongside silver champagne buckets on a long table. A
sunburned young sailor sat with his elbows up on a table, smoking a
cigarette and flicking ash onto the floor. When the train started, he
sauntered out of the buffet and neatly swung himself up into the last
carriage. The guard passed through the carriages snuffing out the candles.
In the tranquil blue of dawn the ancient land unfolded before me: the
mountain peaks lit by the rising sun, crystalline streams rushing over rocky
beds, plane trees and the magical luminescence of the sky, out there, far off
in the distance, towards which our train raced, leaving in its wake a long
narrow cloud of the softest pink steam.
    I got off in Bakhchisarai. The guard told me the easiest way to get to
Sevastopol was by catching the local train that night out of Simferopol. All
I had to do was give the policeman three roubles.
    I had no choice but to spend the day in Bakhchisarai. It was a compact
little town, the alleyways paved with worn flagstones. Water gurgled in its
many fountains. Women collected the water in copper jugs. As the water
rushed into the jugs, it made a sound that changed quickly from a high
treble note to a low bass. This water music amazed me. It seemed to come
from one of those imaginary countries that I had dreamed up. I began to
wonder whether everything I thought I had imagined actually existed, that
these places were not part of my make-believe world but were real lands
that I simply hadn’t yet visited.
   Everything was new to me here – especially the fountains. I had never
seen fountains like these before. Instead of a steady stream of water
spouting from the bronze beaks of herons or the mouths of dolphins, water
here poured lazily from openings in flat stones set flush into the walls. The
famous Fountain of Tears in the Palace of the Khans was unlike any
fountain I had encountered. The water dripped slowly, like tears, from one
shell to another, down and down it trickled, barely making a sound.
   I went to a small café. Every time an oxcart passed by the ramshackle
glass-walled structure shook and rattled. Outside on the verandah pigeons
softly cooed as they waddled to and fro under the wobbly tables. The
windows at the back looked out over a gorge of yellow sandstone
overgrown with thorn bushes. A road led along the side of the gorge to the
cave city of Chufut-Kale.2
   What a life! I thought, sitting on the verandah. Fuchsias in vases set out
on the tables nodded their reddish-black flowers, as if in agreement. What a
life! Romanin was right when he used to say that what we had now wasn’t
life, but a series of ‘encounters with history and geography’. I had hungered
for such encounters. And now I had them. I had to admit that the changes in
my life of late had held more grief than happiness. But despite these
misfortunes, I felt that my youth, as powerful, so it seemed to me, as the sea
that stretches out like an infinite blue wall to the horizon, could ease the
sense of failure and loss.
   I paid for my coffee and headed off for Chufut-Kale. I had no idea what a
cave city was until I saw a sheer yellow cliff-face honeycombed with
hundreds of windows. I climbed a steep path up to a flat ledge at the top of
the cliff and suddenly found myself in a world so ancient it didn’t seem
real. Deep tracks had been hacked into the limestone, yellow with lichens.
Heavy carts had left behind deep ruts. Low doorways led into cave
dwellings. Lizards scurried about on the altar of a small underground
basilica. Who had carved this city out of this mountain of stone? No one
could tell me since there wasn’t a soul in sight.
   Carpets of tiny purple flowers covered every patch of stony soil between
the cliffs. They had a beautiful five-petal shape, although a magnifying
glass would be needed to look at them properly. A thin bay horse grazed
among the rock walls. It often stopped and nodded off, its back twitching
every time wasps landed on it.
   I climbed higher up one of the cliffs and sat down. The rocks were warm
to the touch. Before me I saw a majestic semi-circle of flat-topped hills like
Chufut-Kale. I was alone up here in this airy wilderness. Sheep far off down
below became clumps of dirty wool. I could clearly hear the clanking of
their bells. I didn’t want to move. I lay down and closed my eyes. The sky
shimmered with a blue flame. Sharp rays of rainbow-coloured light
flickered over my eyelashes. Looking up, I saw an eagle soaring overhead.
It seemed to be watching me and trying to decide whether or not to come
down and pay a visit.
   I became aware of the faint sound of dripping water. I turned round and
saw a tiny rivulet, as thin as a fine necklace, trickling out of a crack in the
next rock and hastily releasing its drops like so many beads. I fell asleep.
When I awoke the sky still burned, but not with the blue light of earlier. It
was now a savage ochre. Strange crimson clouds – feathers, plumes,
columns, islands and mighty mountain peaks – stretched from horizon to
horizon. The sun was setting. Its copper disc spread an angry glow over the
rocky cliffs. With every minute this incredible evening fire grew harsher
and ruder. It burned and burned until it reached the culmination of
incandescence only to go out in a flash. And just like that, the sun had set.
Immediately, a cold wind stirred the brambles. I made my way back down.
The fountains of Bakhchisarai sounded louder now than by daylight.
   I drank another cup of coffee in the same café – I didn’t have enough for
any food – and then headed to the station, hungry but light-hearted and
excited. The train arrived at five o’clock in the morning. I didn’t buy a
ticket, but just climbed in and stood in the vestibule at the end of the
carriage. A strapping policeman appeared immediately. He had spotted me
getting on the train. It hadn’t been difficult: I was the only one to board at
Bakhchisarai.
   ‘Your permit?’ he asked, smiling.
   I offered him three roubles. He took the money, saluted casually with one
finger, and walked on. I remained standing in the vestibule.
   I stood glued to the window, anxious to finally catch sight of the sea. It
was getting light outside. The train’s roar echoed as we passed through the
overhanging cliffs. In an instant, the train shot out into the open and crossed
a gorge over a bridge that shook lightly under our weight. Then the
carriages were flung sideways as the train rounded a sharp bend. A hillside
of yellow flowers flashed briefly before my eyes. The curly leaves of a
vineyard flew by and then once again the hollow thunder of an overhang
buffeted the carriage. The jagged cliffs were so close I didn’t dare put out
my hand.
   The greenish water of the sea hit me in the face after we exploded from
the final tunnel. The broad Northern Bay lay out on the horizon, twisting
and turning before receding into the dry haze. Nothing was moving outside
the windows, but the speeding train made it seem as though everything was
twisting, turning and flashing – the black schooners lying keel up on the
beach, the grey battle cruisers, the long minesweepers, the buoys, flags,
guard ships, masts, tiled roofs, fishing nets, bollards, acacias and the empty
tin cans tossed along the beach that shot off flames of reflected sun. And
then finally, amid curls of smoke, the city lay before me in the form of an
amphitheatre, almost as though covered with the bronze patina of its fame.
   Brakes hissing, the train fearlessly tore into a tangle of streets,
courtyards, breastworks and stairways, going up and down slope after slope,
until finally coming to a stop at a handsome station.
   I have seen a great many cities, but none finer than Sevastopol.
   The Black Sea came up almost to its very doorsteps. It filled the rooms
with its sound, its breeze, its scent. Small, open-decked trams cautiously
navigated the hillsides, fearful of slipping into the water. Bell buoys clanged
out by the wharf. On the edge of the market, next to the zinc-lined bins and
the piles of flounders and pinkish goatfish, the small waves lapped against
the creaking hulls of the shalandas, the local flat-bottomed fishing boats.
Breakers rolled in from the open sea, beating against the round bastions of
the fortress. Warships stood smoking in the roadstead.
   Sirens wailed, bottles clinked, calling out to the jingling of the trams and
the peal of the church bells. Straining against their taut anchor chains,
passenger steamers hooted with displeasure. At sunset came the sound of
bugles from the warships striking their colours. The mournful sound
travelled far over the still water. It was soon replaced by waltzes from
Primorsky Boulevard, music so soft and lilting it might be coming not from
the orchestra, but from twilight itself as it sang to sleep the last waves
circling about the Monument to Sunken Ships.
   I walked around the city until I was ready to drop, always finding one
more alluring corner to explore. I especially loved the steps of porous
yellow sandstone that connected the upper and lower town. Houses stood
on rocky ledges on both sides, connected to the landings by narrow, ivy-
covered hanging bridges. The windows and balcony doors stood open, and
from the steps it was easy to hear everything going on inside the houses:
children laughing, women talking, the clatter of dishes, piano scales,
singing, dogs barking, the tinny screech of parrots. For some reason there
were a lot of parrots then in Sevastopol.
   Fearing a sneak attack by the German fleet, the city was dark at night.
But the blackout wasn’t complete. The shop blinds pulled down over the
windows had letters cut out in them through which their interior lights
shone. The streets now glowed mysteriously, as though lit from below by
fiery words: PASTRY SHOP, MINERAL WATER, BEER, FRUIT.
   Talkative women sold violets in large baskets on the pavement late into
the night. They kept a candle burning on a stool next to them. The flame
scarcely quivered – the evening was calm. Crowds of sailors and their
officers gathered in the streets. If not for the blackout and the searchlights
sweeping the distant sky, there was nothing to suggest we were at war. No
doubt this was how seaside towns looked during naval blockades in the
early nineteenth century, when the danger wasn’t that great. Clumsy enemy
gunboats smoked offshore and lobbed cannonballs from their bronze barrels
at the mossy walls of ancient forts. It wasn’t war as we knew it. Now, the
sense of danger felt exhilarating and filled the people of Sevastopol with
that reckless gaiety considered to be the indispensable mark of the brave.
   I sat in the gloaming until nightfall near the bastions of 1854. Below me
lay the Southern Bay and beyond that the harbour. I was surrounded by
blossoming almond trees. No other tree has such a pure and affecting scent.
Their branches bedecked in rose-coloured flowers, they reminded me of
brides before a wedding. The twilight gradually wrapped the unlit city in a
deceptive haze. At first the air shimmered faintly with the gold of the dying
sun, and then it acquired a clean silvery shade as the gold died away. The
silver, too, quickly darkened, losing its transparency and being covered by a
deep, impenetrable blue. Once the blue had been extinguished as well, night
descended.
   I left the bastions for the station in the hope of getting a ticket and
boarding the train without having to show a permit. The train was scheduled
to leave later that night. The first porter I asked agreed to get me a ticket.
   ‘The train won’t leave for another three hours,’ he said. ‘A young fellow
like you, you don’t want to sit around bored in the station. Go have a look
around our beautiful town.’
   I headed off to the tram stop, thinking about the simple kindness of these
southerners, but just then a patrol – two sailors with rifles and armbands –
marched up. They demanded my identity papers.
   ‘Where do you live?’ one of the sailors asked. ‘What street?’
   I admitted I wasn’t from Sevastopol.
   ‘Right!’ he said. ‘Not that you have to be. But we’ve got to take you in to
see the warrant officer. And don’t get any ideas about wriggling out of it.
He can see right through anybody.’
   They took me along. On the way, one of them asked: ‘How much did you
give the porter?’
   ‘Ten roubles.’
   ‘Here’s your money.’ He handed me a ten-rouble note.
   I turned round expecting to see the porter watching me being led off with
malicious joy, but it was too dark to see a thing.
   They took me to a small building not far from Nakhimovsky Avenue.
Sitting on the windowsill in a vaulted room was a wiry, hook-nosed officer
and a girl in a short, checked skirt. She was playing with her two light
brown plaits and swinging a crossed leg. A worn old shoe dangled
precariously from her big toe. Another warrant officer in full uniform –
greatcoat, cap, black revolver on a patent leather belt – sat at a desk. The
sailors gave their report and left the room. The officer at the desk took my
papers and lit a cigarette, wincing from some smoke that got in his eyes.
   ‘Hmmmm, yep!’ the man with the revolver announced after carefully
going through my papers. ‘The little bird strode blithely down the path to
disaster, never bothering to think who was following after.’
   The girl, still swinging her leg, laughed and gave me a look.
   ‘All right then!’ Revolver said. ‘Tell me, in all honesty, just who and
what are you, why you’re here in Sevastopol, and how come you tried to
slip out of town unnoticed? Your papers are in order, not that it means
anything.’
   Embarrassed, I told him the whole story.
   ‘Aha!’ he said, satisfied with my explanation. ‘So, it’s all because of your
artistic nature? Some sort of bohemian, eh?’
   ‘Sasha, stop fooling around!’ said Hook-Nose. The officer with the
revolver ignored the comment.
   ‘If you’re able to prove to me that you are by nature a poet and that
you’ve been lured here by the passion for travel, then maybe, just maybe,
we can come to some sort of agreement,’ Revolver said.
   I couldn’t tell if he was making fun of me or not but decided to at least
pretend that I took him at his word.
   ‘Sasha, if Admiral Eberhardt knew about your techniques of
investigation,’ said Hook-Nose, ‘there’s no way you’d avoid the barge.’
   ‘The barge’ was the name for Sevastopol’s floating prison.
   ‘A poet must know some lines by heart,’ declared Revolver, still ignoring
Hook-Nose. ‘What can you say to that?’
   I wasn’t quite sure what he meant.
   ‘Recite some sort of poem for him. He’s a poet himself,’ the girl
explained.
   ‘Something like “And the Lord did send the raven a little piece of
cheese”,’ Hook-Nose said to me, snickering.
   ‘No,’ I said. ‘If that’s what you want, then I’ll recite for you something
by Leconte de Lisle.’
   ‘Well, just look at you! Very impressive,’ replied Revolver, full of
surprise. ‘No, that won’t do. How about you recite for us some Blok –
something like “I shall never forget it”. But if you want your permit, I
advise you not to forget a word.’
   ‘Enough clowning from you, young man,’ said Hook-Nose, whose words
were ignored yet again.
   I recited Blok’s poem. I liked it myself. The sailors pounded their rifles
on the floor in the corridor. It seemed they were quite surprised.
   ‘Well, I’ll be damned!’ said Revolver, putting on a frustrated expression.
‘Isn’t there someone here in Sevastopol who could vouch for you?’
   ‘No,’ I answered.
   ‘I’ll vouch for him, Sasha,’ said Hook-Nose. ‘Enough of this foolishness.
It’s obvious what kind of fellow he is. Write out his permit. I’ll write out a
guarantee for you tomorrow.’
   Revolver grinned and then slowly, and with considerable effort, began
writing out the permit. As he wrote, the rest of us started talking about
poetry. Hook-Nose liked Fofanov, the girl preferred Mirra Lokhvitskaya.3
She blushed and said that she wished there were time for her to recite a
poem of her own, but it was too long.
   ‘Here!’ said Revolver, handing me my papers and a permit. He sighed.
‘It’s too bad you’re leaving. We could meet once I’m off duty. There’s
plenty we could talk about.’
   I thanked him and said that Sevastopol was clearly a city of wonders.
Nowhere else could my arrest have ended so happily.
   ‘My dear and rather naïve young man,’ said Revolver, ‘Sevastopol is no
city of wonders. Keep in mind – spies and other shady characters never
confide in porters. Now that’s a good epigram, don’t you think?’
   We said goodbye. The girl and Hook-Nose offered to see me to the top of
the hill overlooking the station. Revolver looked disappointed. It was
obvious he wished he, too, could walk through the nighttime streets of
Sevastopol with the brown-haired girl. Along the way, she said to me:
‘Come back and see us sometime. I live on Green Hill, number five. My
name’s Rita. Everyone knows me there. Oh, it’s really too bad you’re
leaving. There are so few of us here in Sevastopol!’
   ‘Us?’
   ‘Poets, of course. There’s just the two of them, and myself. Wait, there’s
also a student from Kharkov.’
   The same porter came up to me. He was grinning from ear to ear. ‘Well
then,’ he said. ‘All straightened out? That’s better. You don’t have to worry,
and I won’t get in trouble. Give me a fiver. I’ll go and get you a ticket.’
   The smell of seaweed drifted in through the open windows of the
carriage. The white rivers of the searchlights poured into the dark depths of
the sea and vanished there without a trace. I was sorry to be leaving this city
and to see this happy day – the first after many weary months – come to an
end.


1 The battleship Empress Maria sank after a fire on board led to a magazine
explosion in October 1915, killing hundreds of sailors. The precise cause of
the explosion remains unknown.
2 An ancient fortified cave city, now in ruins, possibly dating back to the
fifth century CE.
3Konstantin Fofanov (1862–1911), popular and widely imitated poet; Mirra
Lokhvitskaya (1869–1905), poet, known as the ‘Russian Sappho’.

                              OceanofPDF.com
66
The Hotel Great Britain



In Yuzovka I took a cheap room in the Hotel Great Britain. This fetid dump
had been named in honour of Hughes and Balfour,1 two Englishmen who
owned enormous factories and mines in the Don Basin.
   Today there is nothing left of old Yuzovka. What had once been a dirty
and shabby town ringed by wooden huts and earthen hovels is now a
pleasant, well-ordered city. These nasty areas went by a number of
nicknames all reflecting a black humour commensurate with their miserable
appearance: ‘She-Devil’, ‘Bitch’, ‘Dark Angel’. In the same hollow as the
town stood the Novorossiisk Factory, where I had been sent to work. Smoke
belched from its massive chimneys and poured from its various workshops.
The smoke was the yellow of fox fur and stank like scorched milk.
   An extraordinary crimson flame danced above the tops of the blast
furnaces. Greasy soot dripped from the sky. Due to the smoke and soot, the
colour white had disappeared from Yuzovka. Everything that had started out
white had turned a dirty grey with yellowish blotches: grey curtains, grey
sheets and pillowcases, grey shirts. Even white horses, cats and dogs had
turned a dingy, yellow-speckled grey.
   It seldom rained in Yuzovka, and a hot wind blew day and night to form
clouds of rubbish, coal dust and chicken feathers. Every street and
courtyard was covered in sunflower shells. The layer grew thicker after
every holiday. The locals had their own word for chewing sunflower seeds.
‘Husking’ they called it. Every last person in Yuzovka husked. It was rare to
encounter someone without bits of sunflower shell stuck to their chin. Many
locals were true virtu osos in the art of husking, particularly the women
gossiping at their front gates. They husked unbelievably fast and had a
miraculous way of flicking the seeds into their mouths with their
thumbnails, never once missing their target.
   Husking at their gates still left them plenty of time to badmouth their
neighbours, as only lower-middle-class women in the south know how – in
dirty, evil language tinged with an element of naïve impudence. Every one
of these women was, of course, ‘the queen of her yard’. When not husking
and gossiping, the women would fight. As soon as two women flew at each
other, screeching and clawing at each other’s hair, a cackling crowd formed
around them. An old drunk would whip off his torn cap and pass it around
taking bets – two kopecks on the favourite. It often happened that the
women had been intentionally provoked.
   Sometimes the fight grew and grew and got out of control. It wasn’t long
before the whole street joined in. Men rushed out of their houses pulling up
their trousers and carrying lead-tipped whips and knuckledusters. Noses
were broken and eyes blackened, blood flowed. Then, from the ‘New
World’, where the managers of the mines and factories lived, a Cossack
patrol trotted up and scattered the combatants with their horses and their
lashes.
   It was difficult to understand who these inhabitants of Yuzovka were. The
hotel’s imperturbable porter told me they were ‘hangers-on’ – rag-and-bone
merchants, money lenders, market women, kulaks, tavern owners, all of
them feeding off the workers and miners from the nearby villages. Factories
belched smoke from all sides. Dusty, grey pyramids of slag from the mines
lined the horizon.
   The Hotel Great Britain deserves to be described, like some long-extinct
fossil.
   Its walls had originally been painted the colour of rancid beef. After
some time the hotel’s owner came to find this uninspiring and had them
redone with murals in the then fashionable ‘Decadent’ style – white and
purple irises and the heads of women peeping out coquettishly from behind
water lilies. The entire hotel reeked of cheap face powder, strong medicines
and burnt fat from the kitchen. The electric lights produced nothing more
than a smudgy yellow glow, too dim to read by. The beds had broken
springs and a deep valley down the middle. The young maids ‘received
guests’ at any hour of the day or night. Downstairs, sickly-looking youths
wearing bow-ties and caps cocked at a raffish angle played snooker on the
table’s torn and patched baize. Every night someone got his head bashed in
with a cue. The stakes were high. The money was kept in the pockets of the
billiard table. The players never took their eyes off it since quick-fingered
petty crooks lurked about waiting for their opportunity.
   The walls between the rooms were thin. At night I heard sighs, moans,
arguments and, sometimes, women’s bloodcurdling screams. When that
happened, the porter was summoned, the door was broken in, a sobbing
woman in dishevelled clothing – usually one of the hotel maids – ran from
the room, and some drunken youth with a sweaty mop of hair was dragged
out, cursing and swinging left and right at anyone within reach. He was tied
up and given a stern lecture as they pushed him out of the hotel and took
him away: ‘Cheated that poor girl again, didn’t you? You dog. Hanging’s
too good for you!’ The maids rushed to the girl’s side. Still sobbing, she
showed them the few coins – proof she had been swindled – clutched in her
fist. They counted the money and gasped, insisting in unison that all men
deserved to be drowned in sulphuric acid.
   A regular participant in these scandals was a short, grey-haired
commercial traveller – a representative of Mandel & Company, purveyors
of ready-to-wear clothing. He wore a loose-fitting cherry-red suit and sturdy
yellow shoes with bulging toes. He always comforted the insulted women.
   ‘Musya, you oughtn’t to take it so much to heart,’ he would say. ‘You
need to adopt a more philosophical approach to such matters. Just look at
me.’
   ‘You know what you can do with your advice!’ Musya replied through
her tears. ‘I hope you choke on all your helpful ideas. I know all about you
and your philosophy!’
   ‘The ancient Greeks’, he went on, unperturbed, ‘believed that serenity
was the ultimate foundation of happiness. The ultimate foundation!
Understand? Ultima ratio! And so, how much, ultimately, did he cheat you
out of ?’
   ‘A rouble, the snake!’ she said, having stopped crying.
   ‘Here’s a rouble for you. Now dry your tears, fix yourself up all nice and
pretty as you were before, and then bring a bottle of wine, another of
Borjomi and some biscuits to my room.’
   ‘You know where you can go!’ said the girl indignantly. ‘Think you can
have me for a rouble? You smelly old rat!’
   He took no offence. Hands in his pockets, the old man just strolled up
and down the corridor, singing:
       Beneath an Argentine sky so sultry,
       Where the women, like pictures, are so lovely,
       And the southern breezes blow quite softly,
       Dear Joey fell in love with his little Chloë.

   Everyone’s favourite in the hotel was a lodger known as ‘Uncle Grisha’.
A beaten-down, quiet man with a brownish beard and baby-blue eyes, he
went around in an alpaca jacket with nothing underneath. He kept the jacket
wrapped tightly around his naked body out of modesty and was always
shaking, though not from the cold but because he was perpetually hungover.
   It was said that Uncle Grisha was the son of a senator from Petersburg,
that he had graduated from college, squandered a great fortune in Paris,
then had become a piano player in a cinema (or ‘L’Illusion’ as it was
called), and now lived on charity and the odd rouble or two he earned at
parties singing tragic romances and demonstrating his virtuosity on the
guitar. Uncle Grisha was so miserable that even the hotel proprietor, an
obese gentleman in a bowler hat and tight, checked trousers, took pity on
him and gave him a job stoking the boiler that heated the water for tea. In
return, Uncle Grisha lived for free in the small room with the boiler.
   His cubbyhole became a sort of club room. Here the ‘permanent
residents’ of the hotel gathered to play dominoes and cards (almost always
durak2), told fortunes and discussed current events, while the maids darned
socks, sewed or ironed.
   Once a birthday party was thrown here for Lyuba, the second-floor maid.
Four of the lodgers, including myself, were invited, ‘out of respect’. The
other three were Faina Abramovna, an elderly dentist; a tall man on
crutches who worked for a Kharkov newspaper; and Albert, a chemist’s
assistant with delicate, freckled skin and an insolent smile plastered to his
face. The old commercial traveller tried to gatecrash, but the maids
wouldn’t let him in. The girls were all done up in their finest, and Lyuba,
pale and silent in a black dress, looked, in the words of Albert, like ‘la reine
Margot’. Too excited to talk, Lyuba occasionally raised her long eyelashes
and looked at us intently. Each time I was amazed by the innocent sparkle
in her eyes.
   It was hard to believe this was the same Lyuba who had been sobbing a
few nights before, covering a breast with her torn muslin nightdress and
pressing her round, bare knees together as she swore at the top of her lungs
(‘Bastard! Swine!’) at the dirty, thick-set lodger from Room 34.
   Uncle Grisha had shaved and put on a borrowed pink shirt fastened with
a bronze tie pin in the shape of a lizard. We sat down at the table to a meal
of leftover hors d’oeuvres from the hotel buffet and a few bottles of
rowanberry vodka. In the centre stood a large bouquet of violet paper roses.
Lyuba walked over to Uncle Grisha and stroked his few remaining hairs. He
caught her hand and held it and, for a moment, Lyuba pressed his shaking
head to her breast. She was looking over the top of it through the window
and wore her typical calm expression. Flushed and happy, the girls kept
offering us more food and vodka. They looked us sweetly in the eyes,
saying: ‘Please, do help yourselves. Let’s drink to Lyuba’s health and
happiness. Come now, don’t be shy! It’s all quite fresh, straight from the
kitchen, you needn’t worry.’
   Lyuba sat between Uncle Grisha and me. ‘I’ve been meaning to ask you,’
she said, ‘what is it you’re always writing? Every time I tidy your room, I
keep finding little pieces of paper all over the place. What are you writing
about? Something to do with happy lives filled with love and tenderness?’
   ‘Yes, Lyuba,’ I told her. ‘I’m writing about happy lives, about love and
tenderness.’
   ‘Oh, if only my life were interesting,’ Lyuba sighed, ‘then maybe you
could write something about me. A whole book even. People would read it
and weep.’
   ‘Drink, Lyubka,’ Musya instructed her, ‘it’s the best thing to cure your
grief.’
   Lyuba’s eyes had darkened. ‘Shut up!’ she told Musya quietly. ‘I can
handle my grief on my own.’
   ‘Sorry, Lyubka, I just meant I’m on your side,’ said Musya.
   ‘Do you also write songs?’ Lyuba asked, turning to me. ‘And by the way,
don’t pay any attention to that fool Musya. Just ignore her.’
   ‘No, no songs. I used to write poems. I know a lot by heart.’
   ‘Romantic ones?’
   ‘Yes, some.’
   ‘Recite one.’
   ‘All right,’ I said. The vodka had gone to my head by now. ‘I’ll recite
one, but just for you since it’s your birthday.’
   ‘Really, just for me?’ asked Lyuba, lightly tugging on the silver ring on
my little finger. ‘Whose ring is this?’
   ‘Mine.’
   ‘It can’t be.’
   The party had got noisy by now. I paused for a minute trying to think of
something short and simple, but nothing came to mind. Oh well, I thought,
either she understands it or she doesn’t. I began in a slightly sing-song
voice:

       No, it’s not you I love so ardently,
       Not for me the radiance of your beauty:
       I love in you my past suffering
       And my lost youth.

Everyone fell silent.

       Sometimes when I look at you,
       And search your eyes intently:
       I engage in a mysterious conversation,
       Tho’ in my heart it’s to another I speak.

  I stopped.
‘Well, go on!’ Lyuba said sharply. ‘Since you’ve started breaking our
hearts, you might as well finish.’

       I speak to a girl of my younger days,
       In your features I seek those of another,
       In living lips, lips long silent,
       In living eyes, the fire of eyes long extinguished.

   One of the girls drew a noisy breath and started to sob.
   ‘That’s Lermontov,’ said Uncle Grisha, tuning his guitar. ‘He’s better
sung than recited.’ He strummed a soft chord and began to sing in a clear
and pleasing tenor voice: ‘I set out alone on the road, the rocky path shining
through the fog . . .’
   ‘Come on, everyone, join in!’ he ordered, and his guitar resumed its
melancholy tune. ‘Everybody sing! “The night is still, the desert hearkens to
God, the stars converse.”’
   We all sang the end of the stanza softly together. Lyuba sat with her
elbows on the table, her chin resting on her folded hands, gazing out of the
window. Uncle Grisha played, his head raised, tears rolling down his
cheeks. Just then the door flew open and in walked the dirty, thick-set
lodger from Room 34. His lascivious eyes searched out Lyuba.
   ‘Lyubochka, my darling, I’ve been looking for you. Do come out for a
minute. I simply must speak with you,’ he pleaded.
   ‘Talk?’ Lyuba asked. ‘You need to talk to me? In your room?’
   ‘Yes, why not, in my room. That would be best.’
   Lyuba stood up. ‘You know what day it is. So why are you in here
bothering me now, on my birthday? Can’t you stop pestering me? You’ll
have to wait, you bastard, now get lost!’
   ‘Lyubka!’ Musya squealed, but it was too late. Lyuba had grabbed the
bottle of rowanberry vodka and threw it at him with all her might. It hit him
in the head and shattered. He put his hands to his fat face, now covered in
blood and vodka, stumbled backwards out of the room, tripped over the
threshold and crashed to the floor.
   ‘I’ll kill you!’ Lyuba shouted wildly. ‘I’ll kill all of them, the mad dogs!
All of them! Don’t touch me! Don’t even come near me! I’ll get even with
every last one of them, the swine, even if it means forced labour in Siberia
for me. I’ll do it, I’ll do it, I tell you!’
   She collapsed onto a chair and laid her head on the table. ‘Oh, my
friends!’ she said quietly, her voice full of grief. ‘Dear girls, won’t they ever
leave us in peace, to just be as we wish, free of their dirty wickedness?’ She
sat there trembling. After a while she said, ‘It’s as if I’ve had a lovely dream
. . . Thank you, Uncle Grisha, thank you, for this day, my darling. Thank
you all.’
   Lyuba began sobbing and coughing. Uncle Grisha stood next to her,
shaking and fighting to hold back his tears. I put my hands on her
shoulders. Even through her dress I could feel how hot they were. I knew
that she needed to hear those most important words that one hears but once
in a lifetime, words that can save your life. Yet I was incapable of saying
them, of coming to her rescue. Perhaps I should have lied. Perhaps I would
have if I had been certain it would have made things better for Lyuba. I had
spoken those words already, long ago in Belorussia, when Lëlya, dying, her
eyes full of tears, had gently pushed me away.
   But Lyuba didn’t need to hear the words from me. She needed Uncle
Grisha to say them, but he, a drunken, shaky, feeble old man who lived on
charity, was unable. So, I said nothing. I took Lyuba’s hand and held it
firmly. She looked at me through the tears clinging to her eyelashes and
stroked my cheek. No matter how serious people may smirk, no matter
what they may say about sentimentality, I have never forgotten that look of
hers and I never will.
   Loud voices rang out in the corridor, followed by hurried steps and the
jangle of spurs. I stuck my head out to look. The whole corridor was full of
frightened lodgers. A tall thin sergeant followed by several policemen
entered the room. They politely removed their hats.
   ‘Please, come along, miss,’ the sergeant said firmly but with a note of
pity.
   Lyuba got up at once and walked out without looking at anyone. She
didn’t even turn round.
   They took the dirty, thick-set lodger away. The girls fell, crying, into each
other’s arms, while Uncle Grisha grabbed a bottle of vodka with a violently
shaking hand and drank down glass after glass as though it were water. At
this point, the man on crutches, who had not said a word all evening, got up,
shut the door, and said: ‘We’ll be called as witnesses. At the trial we must
say that this man attacked Lyuba, that he cursed at her and beat her, and she
hit him with the bottle in self-defence. And this old man’, here he pointed a
crutch at Uncle Grisha, ‘has to be stone-cold sober. And he has to give the
same testimony as the rest of us.’
   Upon hearing this, Uncle Grisha rose. He stared the man straight in the
eye and said with authority: ‘My dear sir! It’s not for you to give me
instructions on how a gentleman is to treat a lady. I learned this at my
mother’s knee. Although fate has seen fit to bring about my ruin, this does
not give anyone the right to insult my honour. Be that as it may, I shall
forgive you, but only because you acted out of chivalry.’
   Uncle Grisha took the man’s hand and shook it firmly.
   Something shifted in my consciousness that night. I no longer shunned
all those things that had once disturbed me. I stopped treating people so
casually – I now understood that I had an obligation to look for every spark
of humanity in the people I encountered, no matter how different or
unappealing they might seem. There is something in every human heart that
responds, no matter how faintly, to that which is true and good.
                                       •

Not long after the incident with Lyuba I moved out of the Hotel Great
Britain and into the draughtsmen’s office at the shell casing workshop in the
factory. It was the draughtsman Grinko, the thin, consumptive-looking
former SR, who had helped me make the move. He had visited me once at
the hotel and was so disgusted by the smell that he talked me into moving
even though I would not be staying in Yuzovka much longer. Grinko was
the only one who worked in the office. I left the workshop late and slept on
a wooden bench.
   Life at the factory was so different from the suffocating life at the hotel
that they might have been hundreds of versts apart. In the evening after
work I went to the Bessemer shop. I could stand there for hours watching
the molten steel pour from the gigantic tilting furnaces that looked like
black pears three storeys high. I also went to watch the iron being poured
from the open-hearth furnaces. It was a sinister sight. The molten iron ran
into trenches in the ground amid clouds of blood-red steam. Everything
around was either coal-black or burning red. The workers, lit by the hot
liquid iron, looked like demons from hell.
   Sometimes I walked over to the rail-rolling shop. Enormous rollers,
screeching and shuddering, grabbed the white-hot pig-iron and bit down
hard with their cold metal jaws, turning the short, fat billets into long, thin
bars. Each bar went from roller to roller, being stretched and pressed thinner
and thinner, until it finally emerged a deep-red length of rail. The finished
rails skidded inches from your feet on metal rollers amid a heavy shower of
sparks. The vast dark space roared and shook, screeched and rattled,
thudded, clanked, smoked, sparked and hissed with steam. Through the din
came long, loud cries of ‘Watch out!’ as workers raced past with steel carts
carrying glowing pig-iron. If you didn’t jump out of the way in time your
clothes began to smoulder, while overhead, a crane swung with another
mass of hot pig iron clutched in its claws like some massive crab.
   Grinko left the office late. He was a bachelor and in no hurry to get
home. After he had left, I lay down on the couch to read. I liked hearing the
rumble from the factory. It calmed me to know that nearby hundreds of men
were hard at work through the night. A portrait of Bessemer, the man who
had invented this new way of making steel, hung on the wall. I dropped off
to sleep to the shaking, whirring and humming of the factory and dreamed
that I was travelling along on a fast-moving train.
   Seated at his slanted draughting table with his long nose and floppy hair,
Grinko looked like a caricature of Gogol. The similarity was highlighted by
Grinko’s black hat and cloak with lion-head clasps. Such cloaks had once
been worn by naval officers. One day I told him about the hospital train. It
was then that he told me how Sokolovsky had got him out of prison. I tried
not to talk to Grinko about politics. I couldn’t understand how a former
revolutionary could be employed at an ordnance factory, and as a
draughtsman no less. Grinko talked with a contemptuous smirk, bored by
everything, except for those rare moments when a spark of malice flashed
in his eyes.
   I noticed that the workers laughed at him behind his back. They called
him the ‘retired carnival barker’, clearly a sly dig at his former
revolutionary activity. Once, while shining my electric torch into a shell
casing, I found a note inside: ‘Don’t trust the draughtsman. Burn this note.’
I did burn it, and from that moment I began to watch closely all the workers
who delivered the casings, but their faces never gave anything away.
   The day before I left Yuzovka I found a hectographed leaflet slipped into
a casing. The words ‘Workers of the World, Unite!’ had been stamped in the
top right corner. It was a Bolshevik proclamation, calling for the end of the
imperialist war between nations and the start of a civil war between the
classes. I read the proclamation and then stuck it back in the casing. When I
returned to the workshop after lunch it was gone. The workers looked at me
and smiled, but no one said a word.
   The train for Taganrog left in the evening. I said goodbye to Grinko.
   ‘You had no reason to distrust me,’ he said, sitting sullenly at his table
and not raising his eyes. ‘Yes, I was once an SR, but now I’m an anarchist.’
   After a moment he said in voice that suggested he doubted his own
words:
   ‘Anarchy is the only way of constructing a rational human society.’
   ‘Well, all right then,’ I said, ‘God help you!’
   ‘Either you’re an opportunist or a cynic,’ he said quietly though in a
voice filled with anger. ‘And I thought I was dealing with a fellow
progressive.’
   ‘As you can see from my identity papers I’m nothing more than a child
of a petty-bourgeois family from the village of Vasilkov in the province of
Kiev. So what do you expect? But anyway, I’m grateful to you for your
hospitality and the last thing I want is to quarrel with you.’
   ‘It’s clear you’ll go far,’ he said rudely, no longer trying to hide his
feelings.
   ‘Well, not as far as you! I’ll swear to that. Goodbye.’
   I picked up my suitcase. Grinko sat there, still just as sullen. He snorted
and watched me go with his beady eyes but didn’t say a word. I left.
   I waited for the night train to Taganrog in the gloomy buffet at the station
in Yasinovataya. I couldn’t help but think that another brief stage of my life
had passed and brought me nothing but more grief. But strange as it may
seem, this grief did not weaken but actually strengthened my faith that
better days were coming, that the people’s freedom lay ahead. It would
come, I told myself. It couldn’t fail to come, if only because so much
enormous creative energy had been spent in expectation of its arrival.


1 John Hughes (1814–89), a Welsh ironmaster, created the town of Yuzovka
– Hughesovka – in the second half of the nineteenth century. London
businessman and merchant Archibald Balfour lived in Russia and built
himself a large estate in Yuzovka.
2Popular traditional Russian card game for up to six players using thirty-six
cards of a standard fifty-two-card pack.

                              OceanofPDF.com
67
Notebooks and Memory



Writers are often asked whether they keep notes or rely solely on memory.
Most writers keep notebooks but rarely use them for their work. Their
diaries and journals exist as a separate literary genre, and this is why they
are sometimes published side by side with an author’s novels and stories.
   I remember old Shulgin, our Russian literature teacher back at the
gymnasium, always telling us that ‘culture is memory’. At first, we didn’t
really understand what Shulgin meant by that, but with time we realised that
he was right.
   ‘We hold entire centuries in our memory,’ Shulgin liked to say. ‘It’s
memory that preserves the history of the world, all our thoughts, ideas and
visions, and it is the memory of all that has come before that stimulates the
human mind to further creation. Had we no memory, we would live like
blind moles.’
   For a writer, memory is nearly everything. It not only stores gathered
material, it also acts like a magical sieve, separating out and preserving
what is most valuable. The dust and dross pass through and are carried
away by the wind. What remains are small bits of gold, and it is from these,
I believe, that works of art are made.
   I have a reason for discussing notebooks. A few years ago I was shown
the notebook of a dead writer. I started to read it and soon became
convinced that these were not the usual short notes of random impressions
one would expect to find, but a fairly consistent description of some seaside
town. Let me try to reconstruct this description as accurately as possible.
   As I read along, forgotten colours and smells and details of the place
came back to me, but I couldn’t place them. They appeared out of the mist
or as fragments of an old dream that you try to piece together like a broken
statue. What was it about these notes? Most of all it was the description of
trees, especially the acacias:
  The trees’ flowers are touched by a soft yellow and pink bloom and
  appear to be a bit dried out. The leaves cast feathered shadows on the
  white walls and stir from an undetectable breeze. The sight of these
  living shadows is enough to tell you that you are in the south and not
  far from the sea. When the flowers drop, the wind scoops them up and
  rolls them down the street where they crash, murmuring like the surf,
  against fences and the exteriors of the houses.

  I also found in the notebook a description of a slope leading down to the
port. The way down to the harbour and out to the ships and the open sea is
not as easy to describe as might be supposed:

  Cobblestones leading down to the port polished to a leaden sheen by
  the hooves of carthorses. Spilled grains of oats and wheat sprout in the
  cracks between the stones. Steep breastworks overgrown with broom.
  It hangs over from above, like an arrested waterfall – a dense tangle of
  branches, leaves, thorns and yellow flowers. Deep recesses have been
  hacked out here and there in the dusty greenery. Each one is home to a
  little coffee house or shop. Here you can buy seltzer water or baklava,
  a flaky Greek pastry made with honey. All the coffee houses have
  glass fronts. You can look through to see card players in the faded
  striped vests worn by sailors gambling furiously. And there’s more.
  Old women seated along low benches sell roasted chestnuts. The coals
  in the braziers throw off heat. There’s a constant popping sound –
  bursting chestnut shells.
      A sharp turn – down below lies what looks like a toy port straight
  out of a children’s picture book. Narrow piers overgrown with grass. It
  covers the railway tracks. A pity. Otherwise I’d be able to see the rusty
  red rails and the white heads of the daisies clinging to them.
      The barrels of the iron harbour guns, like drinking glasses, are filled
  with brackish water. If you bend over a gun, your heart beats faster –
  the water smells of the ocean and worm-wood, it’s a smell that clears
  your head and reminds you of long sea voyages, the kind that heal
  your soul and quicken the mind.
      Small, greenish waves dance around the pilings. Seagulls screech
  and squawk greedily high overhead, having spotted a school of
  unsuspecting little fish.
   The beating of the waves against the base of the signal beacon’s
hollow iron tower at the end of the pier makes a ringing sound.
Mysterious signs – spheres and cones – hang from the harbour masts.
What do these black spheres predict? Perhaps a storm. Or perhaps a
dead calm. The transparency of the air infuses the seawater all the way
to the bottom. No, it must mean a storm. The black sails of the fishing
boats flap with alarm. Deck lights blink in the twilight.
   The idea of a long sea voyage has already taken root in my mind,
yet nevertheless it will be hard to leave this pleasant little town, where
blue and green shutters rattle against the walls in the breeze and
lighted interiors reveal rooms lined with shelves of big books – no
doubt complete bound editions of The Planted Field, Around the
World, Our Motherland.
   Anyway, I can’t leave because there are no steamships in the port.
They’re all lying far out in the roadstead. No steamships at all? There
is, of course, a tugboat, snorting happily by the landing stage. And an
old schooner, Toiler of the Sea, as well as two disarmed corvettes.
They were towed in a long time ago to be broken up for scrap, but
there they stand in the middle of the port, their heavy anchor chains
reaching down into the water like outstretched arms. The corvettes
dream of their past when they sailed through the Strait of Magellan
and their bows sliced through the oily waters of the Aegean. If you
look carefully you can make out through the dark their curved ram’s-
head bows, bowsprits and funnels.
   By day you can take a little boat out to one of the corvettes, and if
you give the watchman a packet of Gypsy Ada cigarettes he’ll let you
spend as long as you want reading on deck in the shade of the funnel.
Read whatever you like, but such a spot is best suited to poetry or tales
of travel, such as The Frigate Pallada or The Journals of Captain
Cook. Or let the old sun-bleached deck and the smell of the seaweed
clinging to the boat’s iron sides along the waterline suggest something
else.
   From the decks of these corvettes, witnesses of past glories from the
four corners of the globe, you get a good view of the sea. You see it
doesn’t sparkle with azure, turquoise, sapphire, aquamarine or any
other jewels of the southern seas. The sea here is greenish and still. Its
only ornament is the clouds, which the sea happily reflects.
     The clouds slowly rise from the south and take on the appearance of
  medieval cities with their towers, cathedrals, basilicas, triumphal
  arches, glittering oriflammes and distant backdrop of snow-covered
  mountains – Mont Blanc and Monte Rosa.
     Some eccentric artist has lit this town in a whimsical mood. The
  clouds shine, burning in the sunset with all the half-tones of the
  evening light, from blue to gold, from purple to silver.

    I read this description with a nagging sense of familiarity. I kept looking
for some name – of a street, a square, anything – that would tell me what
town this was. Deep down I had a feeling I knew, but I wasn’t certain.
    And then, finally, there it was. ‘Surprisingly, there is no mention of any
of this – the sea, the port, the acacias, the black sails – in the books of one
of our greatest writers who happened to be a native of this town.’ These
words held the key. Of course, this was Taganrog, Chekhov’s birthplace. As
soon as I realised this, everything I had read lost its aura of strangeness and
became vividly real. Yes, this was Taganrog as I had seen it in 1916 when I
arrived from Yuzovka and stayed on until late autumn. I saw it this way
because I was young and a romantic. I lived on poetry and seafaring tales
and I saw what I wanted to see. This is why I didn’t want to return to
Taganrog for a long time as an adult, for fear it would be a completely
different town from the one that I remembered. But in the end, I did. And
with age we tend to lose the life-saving faculty of exaggeration.
    I ended up back in Taganrog in the autumn of 1952 purely by chance, and
I saw that the first impression of my youth had been right. Taganrog was the
same – it had not lost any of its charm even though the character of the
town had changed. Now it was a city of students – of boys and girls with
armfuls of books, happy loud voices in the streets, laughter, arguments and
songs. And where, in 1916, modest suburbs had encircled the old town, nice
little towns for the workers at the new factories had sprung up. But the old
town of Taganrog was just as cosy, quiet and deserted as before. The fishing
boats with their black sails left the shore and headed out to sea so smoothly
that from up on the hill where the monument to Peter the Great stands you
would think the wind was blowing black autumn leaves across the water.
    In 1916, I took a room in the Kumbaruli Hotel. Large, empty and cool, it
had been built back in the days of yore when Taganrog was the richest
settlement on the Sea of Azov – the centre for traders from Greece and
Italy. In those days Taganrog had hosted extravagant performances of
Italian opera, welcomed Garibaldi and Shcherbina – the poet and lover of
ancient Greece1 – and witnessed the death of that bald dandy, Alexander I.
It wasn’t long, though, before Odessa and Mariupol surpassed its wealth,
and Taganrog emptied and fell silent.
   The rooms at the Kumbaruli were so vast, the ceilings so high, that at
night the lamps couldn’t reach to the four corners. It felt as though one had
ended up in a dark tunnel. The murky frescoes on the walls depicted
classical landscapes with ruins, gentle waterfalls and languishing
shepherdesses in red skirts. They were, of course, busy weaving garlands.
   For the first two months I worked at the boiler works owned by Neuve,
Wilde & Company, a Belgian concern. The factory stood outside town in
the middle of the hot steppe. From the workshops you could hear the
chirring of the grasshoppers.
   When I arrived the factory was assembling the very first hydraulic press
for the manufacture of shell casings. Belgian engineers in panama hats and
brightly coloured braces hurried about in the light, empty workshops. They
treated us Russian workers with arrogance and distrust, or at least we never
saw them without a sour expression on their faces. The factory was
experiencing a go-slow at the time. Almost nothing was getting done. It
took a full two months just to assemble the base for the press.
   Food had become scarce in town. Sometimes there wasn’t even enough
bread. Prices were rising, and we lived chiefly on seltzer water and salty
hard tack, cases of which were somehow being surreptitiously obtained
from the quartermaster’s stores and shared among the workers in our shop.
   I could no longer afford to stay in the hotel so I rented a room from a
certain Abrasha Flaks, a loud, carefree broker. Abrasha Flaks was
convinced that along with my work at the factory I was writing stories
about Jack the Ripper and the famous American detectives Nick Carter and
Nat Pinkerton in my spare time. This was the only type of literature
Abrasha deigned to acknowledge. His messy flat was strewn with tattered
dime-store thrillers printed on cheap, dull paper but with bright, colourful
covers depicting the most shocking crimes together with the equally
shocking exploits of the detectives.
   I particularly remember one cover that showed Nat Pinkerton falling into
the clutches of a Black murderer. The killer held Pinkerton by the waist out
over the edge of a bottomless precipice, while Nat coolly pointed his two
revolvers at him. The moral was obvious: if the killer released his grip, Nat
would fall to his death, but not before he pumped two bullets into the man.
Clearly, neither could kill the other without being killed. Abrasha Flaks
adored the cover.
   Abrasha had a small, whining wife with black ringlets, an irritated voice
and scrutinising eyes. ‘Don’t let her size fool you,’ Abrasha said to me in a
confidential whisper. ‘She’s as mean as a feral cat. Better to go and drown
yourself at sea than to live with such a woman.’
   Abrasha never did drown himself, but he did look for distractions on the
side. Once I ran into him on the pier with a mincing, ox-eyed girl. Red
velvet poppies bobbed up and down on her hat while she coyly twirled a
Japanese parasol decorated with pictures of dusky bathing beauties.
Abrasha hired a boat and off they went for a ride. Once they had gone out a
way from the pier the girl began to make suspicious giggles and squeals.
The boatman, Lagunov, a severe, disapproving sort, said that Abrasha Flaks
was a rogue and a skirt chaser and eventually he’d pay the price for it.
Letting a man like that take a boat out was nothing but polluting the sea.
   Every time Madame Flaks learned of his latest affair, the house exploded
in a furious uproar. Madame Flaks would run into the yard in her dressing
gown, fling her thin arms up to the heavens and begin screaming in a heart-
rending voice: ‘Listen to me, all good women, listen, listen to what I have
to say! He’s been at it again with that vile creature, that nasty Lyuska! May
I never see my home again if I don’t kill that viper, and poison myself with
sulphuric acid. Hand her over, I say! Let me get my hands on her!’
   After this Madame Flaks dashed into the street, apparently to the
chemist’s for some sulphuric acid or, perhaps, in search of Lyuska. Her
compassionate neighbours ran after her, brought her home sobbing, and
tried to calm her down: ‘Don’t get so upset, Madame Flaks, you’ll give
yourself a heart attack. Think of your nerves! No man is perfect.’
   ‘Go and fetch my mama!’ sobbed Madame Flaks. ‘My dear old mama.
She’s at 5 Telegrafny Lane! And fetch my little sister Berta. And Aunt
Sofochka. And my clever Borechka. Let them come and judge him as on
Judgment Day! And be sure to go and fetch him too, that dog, or else I
don’t know just what I might do.’
   She threw herself on the floor, rolling this way and that, thrashing and
screaming. The women moaned and fussed about her and administered
essence of valerian until finally, her ‘dear old mama’, a fat and threatening
woman with a dark moustache, appeared.
   ‘I need quiet!’ she thundered in a bass voice before reaching the front
door. ‘What the devil’s going on here? What’s this circus? Dump a bucket
of cold water on her!’
   Madame Flaks calmed down in an instant and began twittering softly like
an injured bird.
   ‘I’m fed up dealing with this ridiculous fool!’ roared dear old mama.
‘Shut up, you lunatic! Take a good look at yourself ! Just as ridiculous as
Khivrya herself.2 Get up, wash your face, and may I never hear another
word out of you, you idiot!’
   A couple of hours later the family trial was held in the yard under my
window. Everyone came, including little sister Berta and clever Borechka.
It was inexplicable and vile that this nasty family squabble had to be played
out in front of others, in the courtyard, in the presence of all the curious and
gossipy neighbours.
   A round table covered with a crochet tablecloth and a few rickety
bentwood chairs were dragged into the yard. Everyone took a seat at the
table, all except Abrasha, that is, who sat a bit off to the side, a defeated
look on his face, as though to signal his status as the accused. The trial did
not begin right away. The rabbi still hadn’t arrived. Meanwhile, the family
waited in silence, staring reproachfully at Abrasha. He always appeared
before the court in complete disarray – a wrinkled undershirt, no collar, his
boots untied. Perhaps Abrasha was appealing for pity, or perhaps his
appearance was intended to signal his repentance, a substitute of sorts for
the ancient custom of sprinkling ashes over the head.
   Eventually the good-natured old rabbi arrived, blew his nose loudly
enough for the whole street to hear, took a seat in a heavy armchair and
proceeded to leisurely stroke his beard with a checked handkerchief for a
time until finally opening his mouth: ‘So, you’ve been up to your same old
tricks, eh?’ And with that, the proceedings began. The trial was conducted
in Yiddish, but this fact in no way lessened the interest of the large crowd of
Russian onlookers who followed every twist and turn of the family drama.
   Every trial ended in reconciliation. The rabbi was then invited in to dine
with the family, and peace was restored to the household, for a time.

                                       •
There was little work for me at the factory. I would go home early and did a
lot of reading and writing. I got a reader’s card for the municipal library. A
few special shelves held books donated to the library by Chekhov. You
couldn’t read the books yourself, but sometimes they showed them to
visitors. The books were by half- forgotten authors – Potapenko, Shcheglov,
Ertel, Izmailov, Barantsevich, Muyzhel3 – with the authors’ autographs or
their inscriptions to Chekhov, all of them in a light, spidery hand, similar to
doctors’ prescriptions.
   My life was so easy that I felt the need to establish some sort of order. I
decided to write at home and then go and read in the harbour on one of the
old corvettes, usually the Zaporozhets. I had become friendly with the
watchman and he let me visit the corvette whenever I wanted. Sometimes,
on warm nights, I even slept on the Zaporozhets. I would hire a boat from
Lagunov, row myself out, tie up to the ship’s iron ladder and climb to the
top deck. I brought a bit of food with me, and together the watchman and I
would prepare tea. It seemed to me that the combination of the sun and little
food – which were constants then – made me stronger and healthier, and
perhaps it really was so.
   I read book after book of poetry that I borrowed from the library. Much
of it I memorised. The music of poetry had captivated me. Only in verse
could the full musical splendour of the Russian language reveal itself. In
poems words sounded as if new, as if they had just been discovered and
spoken for the first time. I was amazed by their precision, their expressive
power, their lustre.
   I could repeat endlessly my favourite lines, and every day I discovered
new favourites. One stanza replaced another. I remembered now
Lermontov’s ‘The silent steppe turns ever blue, embraced by the Caucasus
in its crown of silver’; now Pushkin’s words about how ‘every hour carries
away a bit of life’, now Tyutchev’s spring storm, which reminded me of
how ‘carefree Hebe, while feeding the eagle of Zeus, spilled her boiling cup
of thunder and laughed with mirth as it rained down over the earth’; or Fet’s
spring – ‘From the realm of ice, from the realm of snow, how fresh and
clean, your month of May explodes’.4
   I was surrounded by poets. I held conversations with them, my head
swirled with their wealth of ideas and the richness of their images. Where
did it all come from, I wondered? From what clear well-spring of the
human soul? I felt I was the possessor of incredible riches. Leconte de
Lisle, Heine, Verhaeren, Burns – not only did they speak to me, but they
shared the very best that they had to say. Was this not happiness? I was
surprised then, as I still am today, by those who fail to appreciate or
recognise this joy.
   I even became convinced that foreign poets sounded better in Russian
translations than in their own languages. I particularly recall the poems of
Heredia.5 They matched perfectly the Azov shores with their rocky
promontories, steppe and aura of antiquity, and they echoed the poetry of
Lev Mei,6 with his golden-haired Apollo, his seascapes and crimson
sunsets. Reading the verse of Mei called to mind the lines of Alexander
Blok, as spacious and fresh as the morning air:

       O spring without end, without limits –
       An endless and limitless dream!
       I recognise you, life! I embrace you!
       And greet you with the clang of the shield!7

   Poetry was as real to me as bread, as my work at the factory, as the sun
and the air. It forced me to live in a constant state of tension, in an
unpredictable and infinitely varied world. It swept me along, just like a
torrent carries away a branch broken from a tree. I couldn’t resist it.
   I perceived my surroundings through the lens of poetry. At first I thought
that this lens imparted to my surroundings a new and different dimension,
an exaggerated shine, that they did not truly possess. But that wasn’t the
case. And I have never regretted for a moment my youthful obsession with
poetry. Because I know that poetry is life – life carried to its greatest power
of expression. It is the world revealed in all its depths. It offers us the power
to see things usually invisible to our indolent gaze.
   In Taganrog, for the first time in my life, I was not living by the sea as a
visitor. The impressions it made on me were no longer fleeting. They
deepened and grew stronger. For this reason, I found myself particularly
drawn to poems full of seaside life. I checked them against my own
experiences.
   I often took a rowing boat far out to sea – usually in the evening, after
work. The sun was setting. I stopped rowing; water dripped from the oars.
The sight of the sun going down called to mind the words ‘The golden disc
of the sun, leaving the azure wilderness, slowly submerges into the quiet
embrace of the ripples . . .’ I was struck by the accuracy of these words. The
sun’s golden disc really did descend from the desert of the sky and slowly
disappear into the soft ripples of the sea. There was nothing grandiloquent
or pompous about these words, but somehow they possessed a profound
solemnity. Try as I might, I could never put my finger on that precise
moment in the poem when this quality emerged and then went on to fill the
rest of the lines.
   I liked the little steamship offices in the port, the air dusky blue from
tobacco smoke, the walls covered with timetables. Most of the people
working in them were Greeks. I unconsciously applied to them the meaning
of the lines ‘My searching glance has so often been answered by the same
glances of some Ulysses in the haze of the steamship offices, or some
Agamemnon scoring billiards in a tavern’. I felt certain that I would find
my Ulysses among these people. And I did. His name was Georgy Sirigos.
A dried-up man with a leathery brown face and sad black eyes, a string of
amber worry beads forever dangling in his lean hand, he worked as an agent
for one of the steamship lines.
   Whatever the weather, Sirigos rowed himself out in a small boat to the
steamers anchored in the roadstead. He was considered the greatest living
expert on the Sea of Azov. By the colour of the sky he could tell where the
wind would be the following day or whether schools of herring would be
running in the mouth of the Don. He could predict the direction of the wind
within a degree, better than any wind gauge.
   Sirigos had a beautiful daughter. She often came to her father’s office and
liked to sit on the windowsill absorbed in some book. If anyone spoke to
her, she took a while to respond, raising her head slowly as though
awakening from a dream. Her dark blue eyes never smiled, and her long
black plaits smelled of lavender. She wore a sailor’s pewter bracelet on her
thin wrist. She never spoke to anyone. Sometimes I saw her down in the
port. She would sit along the breakwater, dangling her legs. The splashing
waves dotted her black dress with water. Like so many Greek women, she
was fond of the colour black. A great many sailors wooed her, but she
turned them all away.
   I thought about Sirigos and his daughter for a long time. I don’t know
how many romantic adventures I dreamed up in which his daughter and I
were the heroes of the story.
                                       •

About a mile out to sea from Taganrog stood a signal beacon on some low
rocks. It was called the ‘Sea Turtle’. I liked going out to the Sea Turtle in
fine weather. I tied up to its metal railing and dropped my line in. I mostly
caught black gobies. They wore focused expressions on their faces, as
though they weren’t upset at their misfortune, but were simply trying to
figure out how it had happened. Clear water rippled among the rocks. Off in
the distance I could see Taganrog sitting on the promontory, the cathedral
domes, the lighthouse and the sloping rust-coloured shore.
    One day while fishing at the Sea Turtle I lost track of time and suddenly
realised it was almost dusk. I was sitting with my back to the open sea when
I heard a softly approaching rumble. I turned. The wind had come up. A
murky haze lay along the horizon, lit now and then by flashes of lightning.
In an instant the water blackened, steel-grey ripples raced over the surface.
    I untied the boat and started rowing back to shore. The wind strengthened
so quickly that within minutes waves were splashing over the sides. As
frequently happens on the Sea of Azov, the wind changed direction and
began blowing from Taganrog, driving me out to the open sea. A small,
noisy waterspout went splashing by. The sun went down, and the Taganrog
lighthouse blinked on. Depending on your distance from shore, the
lighthouse’s beam changed colour. I don’t recall the exact sequence of these
lights, but it seems to have gone from red when you were close in, then
green a bit farther out, and finally white at the greatest distance from shore.
I looked. The light was white. It was a long way back to the harbour.
    The wind was raging. It blew in powerful gusts, first this way, then that,
and whistled malevolently over the oars. The waves beat against the bow,
the boat was lifted up in the darkness, and I could hear the sea hurling
bucket after bucket of water into its bottom. The water was up to my ankles.
I had to start baling. I dropped the oars and began feeling around for the
scoop, but the waves spun the boat around. I lost my balance and then
realised that the next big wave would flip it over.
    I grabbed the oars and began rowing with all my strength. My wet shirt
clung to me, making it that much harder to row. My hands were burning. I
must have torn open some blisters. When I next looked up the light had
turned to green. I was getting closer. ‘Just a bit more,’ I said to myself. ‘A
little more! It’ll turn red any second and then you’re safe.’
   I lost all sense of time. It must have been around midnight. The heavy
darkness roared and raged around me. I couldn’t even see the foam on the
waves as they crashed into the boat. I rowed and rowed, groaning from the
strain. My wet hair covered my eyes, but I didn’t bother to brush it away
since there was nothing to see and if I stopped rowing even for a second the
wind pushed the boat farther out.
   I looked again and swore – the beam was back to white. I was being
carried away, and it seemed there was nothing powerful enough to push my
boat forward against such a raging wind. I dropped the oars and began
baling. A strange indifference took hold of me. As I baled, I recalled for
some inexplicable reason Mama and Galya, the side street in Lublin where I
had picked a sprig of lilac for Lëlya, the lowering sky over the road to
Baranovichi, a woman’s warm palm gently stroking my cheek, the fire in
the Kobrin synagogue. The memories came and went with no connection or
logic, one after another. I felt for a while as though I couldn’t hear or see
anything.
   When I lifted my head again the light shone faintly far away on the
horizon like a drowning star.
   I picked up the oars and, now numb, began to row slowly, evenly. I was
surprised to still be alive. A wave struck me, and for a time I wasn’t sure
what had happened. After my head cleared, I looked up again. I saw a green
light. Instead of feeling joy, I was seized by rage. I started to row so hard
that the oars bent. I stood up and rowed, I leaned into the oars with my
whole body. I was swearing and then began repeating the same ridiculous
words over and over, unable to stop: ‘To hell with you! I’m not giving up!’
   Time passed, and I felt certain that the night would never end. And then
there came a new ungodly roar from behind my back. Turning, I saw the red
beam of the lighthouse. The port was close now. The roar was that of the
surf crashing against the pier and then rolling back and slamming into the
oncoming waves. Columns of frothy black water shot up into the sky. The
greatest danger lay at the entrance to the port – what the sailors call the
‘Devil’s Cauldron’. The only way in was through a thick wall of churning,
roiling water.
   Lights were burning on either end of the breakwater. I turned my boat
towards the space in between. My body tensed at the threat of danger.
Watching the lights, I tried to gauge where the waves were taking me, and
then rowed furiously in the other direction. I screamed at the top of my
lungs to make it easier. The boat tossed like a cork in a whirlpool. It flew up
one side of a wave, and crashed down the other, its bow buffeted in all
directions, its bottom shuddering under the blows.
   A clear, white light exploded overhead. There was no way I could have
known it at the time, but I had been spotted from the breakwater and a flare
had been shot off. I caught sight of the black walls of the breakwater above
me and felt the violent surging of the water begin to subside. The lights on
the ends of the breakwater slowly receded and all at once the boat floated
along smoothly. I could make out up ahead the corvettes’ familiar, tall
bowsprits and the coiling reflection of lights over the water.
   ‘Hey, you, in the boat! In the rowing boat!’ someone shouted.
   A lantern swung on the breakwater. I rowed over towards the light, found
the stone steps and dropped the oars. A few of the port guards pulled me out
of the boat and led me over to the guardhouse, where I saw myself in the
blinding glare of an electric light – drenched to the bone, my clothes in
tatters, my hands bloody and blue from the cold.
   ‘God was watching over you,’ said a white-haired port inspector with
fierce eyebrows. ‘Why did you go out to sea when the storm signals have
been flying since two o’clock?’
   ‘I can’t read the signals,’ I confessed.
   ‘I see,’ he said and then held out his silver cigarette case. ‘Remember,
everyone has to be able to read storm signals. It’s true not only at sea, but in
life too. If you want to avoid disaster.’


1 Nikolai Shcherbina (1821–69), Russian poet of Ukrainian and Greek
parents, best known for his Greek Verses (1850).
2Khivrya is Cherevik’s unfaithful wife in Gogol’s short story ‘The Fair at
Sorochyntsi’ from his Evenings on a Farm near Dikanka (1832).
3 Ignaty Potapenko (1856–1929), a former friend of Chekhov’s at whom,
after their falling out, Chekhov poked fun with the figure of Trigorin in The
Seagull; Ivan Leontiev (pen name Shcheglov) (1856–1911), author of short
pieces of humour, stories on military life and several plays; Alexander Ertel
(1855–1908), author of two large novels and a number of short stories;
Alexander Izmailov (1779–1831), poet and publisher; Kazimir
Barantsevich (1851–1927), prolific author of tales chiefly chronicling the
lives of Russia’s lower-middle classes; Viktor Muyzhel (1880–1924), short-
story writer and novelist whose works focused mostly on Russian peasant
life.
4 Lines from Lermontov’s ‘In Memory of A. I. Odoevsky’ (1839);
Pushkin’s ‘It’s Time, My Friend . . .’ (1834); Fëdor Tyutchev’s (1803–73)
‘Spring Storm’ (1828[?], completed early 1850s); Fet’s ‘Another May
Night’ (1857).
5   José-Maria de Heredia (1842–1905), Cuban-born French poet.
6   Lev Mei (1822–62), Russian poet and dramatist.
7First stanza of an untitled poem from Blok’s cycle ‘Invocation by Fire and
Darkness’ (1907).

                              OceanofPDF.com
68
The Art of Whitewashing



I was transferred from the Neuve, Wilde factory to the Vaksov oil mill. The
summer of 1916 had come to an end.
   The owner was a fat, incompetent young man believed by the people of
Taganrog to be a millionaire. He always went about in a dirty, rumpled silk
suit, scratching his patchy ginger beard with his five fingers and talking
nonsense. Intent on demonstrating his patriotic fervour, Vaksov installed a
hydraulic press at the oil mill and started manufacturing shell casings.
Nothing, however, came of his big plan: Vaksov’s press produced nothing
but rejects. There was nothing for me to do at Vaksov’s mill, so I sent a
letter to my immediate superior, Captain Velyaminov in Yekaterinoslav,
requesting that I be relieved of my duties. A week later I learned that my
request had been granted.
   I had been quick to leave my job at the mill because an old fisherman by
the name of Mykola from Petrushin Spit, whom I had met at the Taganrog
market, had agreed to take me on as his assistant. A fellow who said he was
going to ‘some hellish farm’ farther up the road let me hitch a ride to
Petrushin Spit on his oxcart. The wheels kept sinking up to the axles in the
sandy dust. The man turned to me and said: ‘Just look at this damned stuff !
Can’t hardly move. But there’s a way of dealing with it, you know. An old
way, tried and true.’
   ‘What’s that?’
   ‘You spray the roads with seawater. The salt binds the dust just like
cement. Our womenfolk pour salty water on the mud floors back home in
our huts and so they’re as hard as stone. They do the same thing when
threshing wheat to make the ground hard and flat. That’s how it’s done, sir!
You’ve got to know what goes with what in this world or else you’re likely
to make all sorts of mistakes.’
   He dropped me off at the bluff above Petrushin Spit and drove on,
shouting lazily at the drowsy oxen: ‘Get on, you devil’s slaves! May the
cholera strike you dead!’
   I looked down from the bluff onto a long sandy spit dotted with a few
dazzlingly white huts. Fine pink nets hung drying on poles along the shore.
Small black wooden fishing boats, what they called baidas, rocked gently in
the clear water. There was nothing else, save for the indigo sky, the sea, the
sun and some yellow grass which swayed in the wind.
   Walking down the steep slope I spied three bare-footed, tow-headed
children – two very little boys and a girl about eight or so – running as fast
as they could straight towards me. The girl was ahead and turned to yell to
the boys: ‘Faster! It’ll be too late to hide! Faster!’ Then all three of them
disappeared as though they’d been swallowed up by the earth. But as I
passed a tall clump of thistles, I heard a soft whimpering and a hurried
whisper: ‘Stop crying! He’ll hear you. I’ll pull the splinter out for you.’
   The children had hidden in the thistles. Once I had passed, they came out
and followed me, though at a cautious distance. One of the boys was
limping; he must have stepped on a thorn. I stopped and called out to the
children. They approached, slowly, shyly, avoiding me with their eyes, and
sniffling. The two boys tried to hide behind the girl.
   ‘Hello,’ I said to her. ‘Can you tell me where Grandpa Mykola lives?’
   She started, looked up at me with a pair of shining blue-grey eyes, and
smiled. That smile, just like her entire small, suntanned being, radiated
friendliness, awkwardness and pride – pride that this mysterious stranger
from the city had asked her and not the boys.
   ‘Come on, Uncle!’ she said boldly, taking me by the hand and leading
me, happy and flushed, to the last of the tiny huts right on the water’s edge.
Women of all ages suddenly appeared, as if by an invisible command, at
their doorways. They hastily straightened the kerchiefs on their heads,
greeted me warmly and teased the girl: ‘Natalka, where’d you find yourself
such a handsome fellow? Aren’t you a clever little thing! We were all
wondering who’s that she’s got with her – could it be the captain of the
Kerch?’
   The Kerch was the small paddle steamer that travelled between Rostov
and Mariupol. Sometimes it stopped at the fishing villages on the various
spits along the way to deliver supplies. Apparently, the children thought that
the boat was something out of a fairytale.
   Natalka walked proudly on, ignoring the women’s teasing comments. Her
flushed cheeks, however, gave away her joy. The two boys, conscious of
their insignificance, trudged along behind us in a deep, reverential silence.
And so we walked to the hut of Grandpa Mykola, where Natalka delivered
me into the hands of a skinny old woman with shrewd eyes – Grandma
Yavdokha, Mykola’s wife.
   These were the good omens that greeted me and my new life on
Petrushin Spit.
   Grandpa Mykola had been glad to hire me. All the young fishermen had
been conscripted into the army and sent off to war, and so, in his words,
‘there was fabulously no one left to do the work’. Grandpa Mykola used the
word ‘fabulously’ to mean all sorts of things. It could mean ‘completely’ or
‘undoubtedly’ or ‘many’ and even just ‘yes’. His answer to any sort of
question was often ‘Fabulously!’
   He took me on for ‘grub without pay’. In other words, Grandpa Mykola
was obliged to feed me, and in return I declined any money from the sale of
our catch. I ate so little that the deal proved to be a good one for Grandpa
Mykola, so good in fact that he and Grandma Yavdokha couldn’t help
discussing it between the two of them. They found my agreeing to these
terms something of a mystery and became convinced that I must be a bit
touched and something of a ‘holy fool’.
   I began my education in ‘the science of fishing’. It truly was a sort of
science, a complicated craft that demanded ‘fabulously’ great experience
and a special knowledge handed down from generation to generation of
fishermen that was not to be found in any book. Grandpa Mykola initiated
me into this science slowly, little by little, both by showing me how it was
done and by sharing stories from his past. Gradually I learned the various
kinds of fish in the Sea of Azov and their habits as well as the main routes
by which they travelled. I learned how to read the sea’s weather patterns
and its winds (of which there were many) – ‘Tramontane’, ‘Bora’,
‘Mountain’, ‘Delta’, ‘Chaser’, ‘Lower’, ‘Upper’, ‘Kerch’, ‘Levant’ and still
others, more rare.
   Every fisherman had his own ‘place’ on the sea where he set down his
nets. Everyone was careful to respect these boundaries. The first thing
Grandpa Mykola taught me was how to orient myself on the water by
taking my bearings from landmarks on shore.
   ‘Look right there,’ he would say. ‘When that dead tree on the slope hides
the cross on Taganrog Cathedral from view, that’s our line. We need to stick
to it and move fabulously straight along just like on a string until the nearer
of those two burial mounds hides the one a bit farther on. Where the two
lines meet is our place and we can stop and let down our nets.’
   In calm weather it was easy to hold to the line, but when the wind was
blowing I fought with the oars for a long time until I learned how to
manoeuvre the awkward baida to the correct spot. We let down our nets
every evening and pulled them up every dawn, regardless of the weather.
Only in the worst of storms did the fishermen stay at home. They never
admitted that it was too dangerous to go to sea, saying instead that the
rough waters had ‘upset’ all the fish and so there was no point in checking
the nets.
   I saw many dawns at sea. Some were warm and gentle. The morning’s
glow was born in the stillness of the night. A soft blue began to appear in
the eastern sky, the stars faded – not all at once, but slowly, as if they were
moving farther and farther away, growing paler and shrinking into the depth
of the sky – and a light fog drifted over the crystal-clear water. By the time
we had reached the nets the sun was up. Our baida cast a shadow, turning
the water a deep malachite green. It was so still that the clunk of an oar
against the side of the boat could be heard far out at sea and as clearly as
across a room. The fishermen called mornings like this ‘angel dawns’. But
some dawns were chilly, grey and raw. The wind whipped reddish-brown
waves, and a dirty white haze swirled along the horizon. Some dawns were
black and stormy with torn skies; some were a dull green and spat spray in
your face. A red dawn with a fevered sky and a cutting wind always meant
a storm, but these were rare – it was August, the calmest, warmest month on
the Sea of Azov.
   Grandpa Mykola sold his fish directly to dealers – loud, sharp-tongued
women – or sometimes on a Sunday he took it himself to the market in
Taganrog. He was a quiet, almost sullen-looking old man, unlike the other
fishermen on the spit. Yavdokha was an ailing, gentle sort who sighed and
held her tongue in his presence but loved to complain of his miserliness
behind his back.
   It was a custom on the spit to whitewash all the huts on the same day.
They did this often – before every holiday and after every rain. The women
got together early in the morning and whitewashed one hut after another,
beginning with Grandpa Mykola’s, the last hut on the spit. These were
cheerful occasions. The women – their skirts hitched up over their sturdy,
suntanned legs, their faces flushed, their white teeth flashing – yelled back
and forth, joked, laughed, jingled their necklaces and gave suggestive looks
at the menfolk from under their long eyelashes. ‘Sorcery’, Grandma
Yavdokha called it, ‘bewitchment’.
   The best whitewasher was Natalka’s mother, Khristina – a thin, friendly
woman with a bright coral necklace dangling from her brown neck. Her
husband was away in the army, so she and Natalka fished together on their
own small baida. Using nothing more than a crude piece of tree bark,
Khristina painted clean, neat borders of blue and green around the windows.
I remembered what the oxcart driver had told me about salt and
recommended to the women that they add a bit to the lime in their
whitewash to keep it from smearing and make it last longer. They did and
were pleased. To show her gratitude, Khristina painted beautiful big blue
roses and cockerels on the stove in Grandpa Mykola’s hut.
   On Sundays I took Natalka and the two boys out with me in a baida. We
dropped anchor close to shore and fished for gobies. We always spoke in
whispers. Natalka never stopped whispering about whatever passed through
her head – all manner of news and gossip, like the story of an old woman
with eyes of iron who roamed along the high road through the steppe and
whoever she looked at was certain to immediately lose a relation or close
friend at the front. Or how every night the thistles on the burial mound
burned with a red flame (‘I haven’t actually seen it myself, but that’s what
they say’) and some sailor from Mariupol had bet three roubles that he
would go and light his cigarette from this flame.
   ‘Well, did he?’ the frightened boys asked.
   ‘Of course he did!’ Natalka answered nonchalantly. ‘And he didn’t even
die. A sailor can do anything. Oh, and I saw lightning over the water all last
night, but it wasn’t really lightning, it was the souls of dead soldiers killed
at the front. They’re trying to make contact with us. They want to talk to us.
Mama says that someday it could be Papa’s soul crackling over the water
like that. Then she starts crying. I try to calm her down and always tell her
that no bullet will ever take Papa away because I buried my little iron cross
under the stone woman out in the steppe, and then hopped around it on one
leg three times, saying: “Blessed St Nicholas of Myra, patron of all sailors,
don’t let my Papa die.”
   ‘I suppose you think I’m lying,’ said Natalka anxiously. ‘But I’m not!
God punish me if I say anything that’s not true.’ She crossed herself and
then crossed her fingers as proof. The boys looked at her with terror in their
eyes and furtively crossed their fingers as well.
   One day in October Mykola brought me three letters from the post office
in Taganrog – one from Mama, one from Romanin and a third in a clumsy,
unfamiliar hand. For a long time I couldn’t bring myself to open them. Like
the time in Odessa when I had wanted to join the hospital steamer Portugal,
I felt as though I were a traitor. I had chosen an easy life for myself while
the war still dragged on and there was the sense of a vague storm just over
the horizon.
   ‘Of course,’ I told myself, ‘the simplest thing for me to do is stay here on
the spit, to fish, enjoy the warm sun, build up my strength and read good
books, as though there was no war on and all was right with the world. It’s
no good telling myself that they wouldn’t let me return to the front or that I
need to go out and collect all sorts of experiences in preparation for that
“great future” of mine as a writer.’
   For some reason I thought of the words of Polonsky: ‘A writer, being
nothing but a wave on the sea that is Russia, cannot help but be carried
along by the elements.’1 Polonsky had been right, of course. If I truly
wanted to be a writer, then I needed to be in the thick of things and not hide
away in the quiet of the steppes and soothe myself with the music of poetry,
no matter how beautiful.
   I decided to return to Moscow even before I had read the letters. I walked
down to the shore where the baida lay half out of the water, climbed into
the stern, opened the letters and began to read. Romanin wrote that our unit
had moved to Molodechno near Minsk. There was little work at the
moment, but he had no plans to leave because he foresaw significant events
happening soon (these words he had underlined) and he had some other
reasons of his own for staying in the army.
   ‘As for you,’ Romanin wrote, ‘I think they’d take you back in the unit
now. See what can be done in Moscow and get back here. Gronsky has
recovered and is with us again. He’s settled down and is very reserved.
Kedrin is working in the administration in Minsk. Still making a fool of
himself, as always. How are you, and where are you? Lord knows what
you’ve got up to!’
  Mama wrote that she and Galya were delighted with Kopan. The house
and farm were keeping them very busy. She noted that it would be nice if I
were to come and visit.
  The third letter was from Lyuba in Kharkov.

  I’m writing c/o general delivery in Taganrog on the off chance you
  might receive this letter. Faina Abramovna told me you were in
  Taganrog. Your deposition was read at the trial. Thank you, my
  dearest. I was acquitted and sentenced to just a month’s penance in a
  convent. Can you imagine that? Me, a nun? Uncle Grisha died of
  delirium tremens. The poor man. I’m so sorry he’s gone and can barely
  stand it. They buried him without me.
     I’m in Kharkov now, selling tickets in a cinema. If I knew for
  certain where you were, I’d come and see you for a day, if only to talk
  – I feel so alone and there’s no one here I can talk to. I haven’t
  forgotten what you did and never will. Write should you have plans to
  pass through Kharkov. I’ll come to see you at the station, day or night.
     Love and kisses. Your Lyuba.

   I decided to wait for the Kerch to take me to Mariupol and make my way
from there by train to Moscow. I was putting off leaving because I was
certain I would never see this blessed place again. Besides, the final days of
October had been so calm and warm that I couldn’t tear myself away. It was
a shame to forgo even a minute of this magnificent autumn. The beautiful,
clear days broke slowly through the morning mist. Burning it away, a
dazzling yet faintly chilly light shone all day long until the sun went down.
The sea was dead calm, and every little sound carried far across the water.
Unlike summer, the autumn was filled with a lingering resonance. Dead
leaves crunching underfoot, a steamship’s distant whistle, women’s voices
in the yards – nothing died away at once, rather an obscure vibration
lingered in the air, like the slow tolling echo of a bell. It was as though the
autumn air were a vast sensitised medium trying to preserve the sounds of
each hour and moment – as though the autumn itself, sorry to have to leave
these places and people, were listening and committing them to memory.
   In the end, two events finally made up my mind to leave. The first
happened in Taganrog. One day the fisherwomen returning from the market
told us that there had been a disturbance in town. A crowd of hungry
women and children had raided the bakeries and food shops and the
Cossacks had refused to fire on them.
   The second seemed insignificant by comparison. I was mending Grandpa
Mykola’s nets when a lanky fisherman by the name of Ivan Yegorovich
came over and sat down beside me. We each lit a cigarette and then he said:
‘For a long time now I’ve been meaning to talk to you about something
that’s been on the minds of all of us here on the spit, but I’ve just not been
able to bring myself to do it. You’re an educated man, so perhaps you look
at things differently than we fishermen do. If so, I hope you’ll forgive me.’
   ‘What’s all this about?’ I asked.
   ‘Well, it just doesn’t seem right. All our young men are off in the army,
and their wives and kids are back here on their own, and the womenfolk are
thrashing about like a fish on dry land trying to get by and keep everybody
fed. They’re out there fishing by themselves, and sometimes it’s just too
much for them. And then here you are, a strong young man, working for
Grandpa Mykola. You ought to go help one of the women, maybe Khristina
in her baida. Now that seems fair. Folks here find the whole situation a bit
strange. Grandpa Mykola is just using you so he can stuff a few extra
roubles in his money box.’
   I felt myself blushing. Ivan Yegorovich was right. Why hadn’t I thought
of that? I told him that these things had never occurred to me, and now I
was getting ready to leave so there was nothing I could do.
   ‘Well, why don’t you rethink that and stay here on the spit? Folks here
would like that.’
   ‘No, I can’t.’
   ‘Well, then, I’m sorry I’ve bothered you,’ said Ivan Yegorovich. He rose.
‘It’s your business. You need to do what’s best. Good health to you.’
   After this conversation I had no more desire to help Mykola and
Yavdokha. I decided to leave the very next day for Taganrog, but to my
surprise the Kerch arrived that same evening. It was sailing for Mariupol.
   Everyone on the spit came to see me off. They wished me well and much
success and gave me a parting kiss, but only after first carefully wiping
their mouths with the back of their hands. Khristina, together with Natalka
and the two boys, rowed me out to the Kerch. I said nothing to Khristina
about my conversation with Ivan Yegorovich. I was too ashamed of my
stupidity. I climbed up onto the deck, covered with hay bales, and found a
place along the railing. The siren let out a ferocious bellow, quite out of
keeping with the steamer’s shabby appearance and inconsiderable size. The
paddle wheels set in motion, churning the water to a frothy green. Natalka
was standing in the baida. She was frowning and then covered her face with
her sleeve. I could see that she was crying. Khristina bent over her, ruffled
her hair and laughed.
   The baida began to move away, along with the shore, where the women
stood waving white kerchiefs – it looked as though a flock of seagulls were
weaving round and round low over one small spot of sand, unable to decide
whether or not to land. Natalka, too, her face stained with tears, stood there
waving a faded green shawl. The steamer carried me away from the steep
shore. Once again, as with every big change in my life, my heart felt heavy.
Making it worse was the sense that my life had no continuity. It seemed to
be nothing but a series of disconnected fragments. People suddenly
appeared in my life, and then they disappeared from it just as suddenly,
perhaps forever.
   From Mariupol I sent a telegram to Lyuba in Kharkov. I regretted it
immediately, but by then it was too late.
   The train arrived in Kharkov early one chilly morning. Lyuba was
waiting for me on the platform. She was wearing a short jacket and a light
shawl over her head. She was so cold her lips had turned blue. She raced
towards me. We kissed. Then she looked carefully into my eyes, took me by
the hand, and without saying a word we went and stood behind a boarded-
up kiosk on the platform.
   ‘Don’t say anything,’ Lyuba said.
   She put her arms around my shoulders and laid her head against my
chest, as though seeking protection. I was silent. She held me tighter. Her
head was trembling. We stood like this for several minutes. The third
whistle blew. Lyuba looked up, quickly made the sign of the cross over me,
turned and then walked off down the platform, the edge of her shawl
pressed to her face. I got back into my carriage. The train moved off.


1A line from ‘For the Album of K. Sh. . . .’ (1865) by the late Romantic
poet Yakov Polonsky (1819–98).

                             OceanofPDF.com
69
A Raw February



In Moscow I went straight from the station to the headquarters of the Union
of Cities. The first person I ran into there was Kedrin. We were so pleased
to see each other after so long that we kissed. Kedrin had been sent to
Moscow from Minsk on business. I told him I wanted to rejoin the unit.
   ‘That’s a tricky matter,’ he said. ‘Let me see what I can find out.’
   He left to see what he could do and was gone a long time. When he
finally came back, he told me with an air of mystery that at present nothing
could be done to help. Morale in the army was quite unsettled, it was a
tense time, and it would be better to avoid any trouble at the front. That was
the opinion of the union’s leadership. I was deeply upset. Kedrin removed
his glasses, cleaned them, and then put them back on and looked at me
closely.
   ‘Don’t get down,’ he said at last. ‘We’ll find you some work. Romanin
showed me that piece of yours, “Blue Overcoats”. You can write.’
   He wrote a letter recommending me to an acquaintance of his who
worked in the editorial office of a Moscow newspaper. I went immediately
and was met in a dusty room by a bald man with the face of an old actor. He
was sitting behind a desk buried under galleys. Seated across from him in a
heavy armchair was a fat little man with the silver moustache of a
Zaporozhian Cossack dressed in a grey long-waisted coat and a lambskin
hat. There was a wily twinkle in his eyes. He could have been Taras Bulba
himself.1
   The bald man read Kedrin’s letter and said: ‘So, I see there’s still some
life in that old dog yet! Just a moment.’ With that he shoved Kedrin’s letter
under a pile of galleys and went on with his writing.
   Taras Bulba pulled a silver snuff box out of his coat pocket, tapped it
with a finger, opened it and then, with a quick conspiratorial wink, offered
it to me. ‘Please, have some! General Skobelev himself presented it to me
after Plevna.’
   I said no, thank you. Taras Bulba deftly sprinkled some snuff onto his
thumbnail, snorted it up his nose and let out a deafening sneeze. There was
a smell of dried cherries. The bald man didn’t pay Taras Bulba the slightest
attention. Taras Bulba nodded in the direction of Baldy as he gave me
another wink, picked up a horseshoe being used as a paperweight on some
galleys, and then proceeded to bend it straight. At this, Baldy looked up.
‘That’s an old trick!’ he said. ‘That won’t get me to change my mind.
There’s a war on – no advances!’
   ‘You’ve got a visitor,’ said Taras Bulba, pointing to me. ‘All I was trying
to do was remind you of that fact. Nothing more.’
   ‘Well, all right then,’ he said reluctantly and gave me a look. ‘Let’s see.
Tell us, who are you then? Oh, by the way, I’m Mikhail Alexandrovich, and
this’, here he pointed to Taras Bulba, ‘is the king of Moscow reporters – the
poet, former wrestler, actor, connoisseur of local slums and bosom-friend of
Chekhov and Kuprin,2 the famous ‘Uncle Gilyai’, the one and only
Vladimir Alexeevich Gilyarovsky.’3
   I didn’t know what to say.
   ‘Ignore him. I don’t bite!’ said Gilyarovsky, noticing my unease. He
shook my hand so hard he nearly crushed my knuckles. He got up and
started towards the door but stopped, nodded at me and said: ‘I believe in
him.’ With that Gilyarovsky walked out, humming a tune.
   Baldy hired me, told me how fortunate I was, and said: ‘These are
perilous times, fraught with uncertainties. It appears we’re about to witness
Russia’s second “Time of Troubles”.4 Things appear calm on the surface,
but underneath the country’s boiling, and the tighter the government tries to
screw down the lid, the bigger will be the explosion. We need to keep an
eye on this simmering pot. We need to know what Moscow is thinking and
talking about. What are people saying in the theatres, at home, at the
markets and in the factories, in the banyas and on the trams? What are the
workers saying, the cabbies, cobblers, milkmaids, actors, merchants,
engineers, students, professors, soldiers and writers? That’s going to be
your job. For now, and then we’ll see.’
   That same day I took a small room in Granatny Lane, the very street
where I had been born twenty-three years earlier.
   I noticed that Russians spoke most freely in trains and taverns. So, I
began my work on the loud, smoke-filled suburban lines that extended up to
sixty versts from Moscow. I would buy a return ticket and ride to the end of
the line and back. I managed to visit a good many towns around Moscow
and quickly became convinced that the city was surrounded by an ancient,
moss-covered Russia about which few of even the oldest Muscovites had
any idea.
   The backwoods started just fifty versts from the city – brigand-infested
forests, impassable roads, tumbledown settlements, rotting old churches
besieged by holy fools, starving horses covered in their own excrement,
brawling drunks, graveyards with broken crosses, peasants living alongside
their sheep, snotty children, savage monasteries, rubbish-strewn markets
shrill with squealing pigs and vile cursing – nothing but decay, poverty and
thieving wherever you looked.
   And throughout the whole of this land, where the wind whistled in the
bare branches of the birch trees, you could hear the harsh, stifled weeping
of women. Soldiers’ mothers, wives, sisters and brides. They wept quietly,
hopelessly, as though no one and nothing could ease their grief.
   So did this land lie waiting for winter – palisades of young firs black
against the crimson of the dying autumn sunsets, the crackly first ice, as
fine as sugar, the smoke of frozen villages drifting over the fields. Never
before had Blok’s lines seemed so prophetic:

       My Russia, my life, are we to languish together?
       Yoked to the Tsar and Siberia, to Yermak and prison . . .

   I listened to endless conversations – drunk and sober, meek and
desperate, resigned and angry – and the one thing they had in common was
the hope for peace so that the soldiers could come home from the war and
life would become less of a struggle, for without this there was nothing left
to do except to die a hungry death. It seemed as if all the people’s anger had
been gathered out there, to the west, in the army. The village was waiting
for this anger to roll back like the tide, smashing their hateful old way of
life and sweeping away their wretched existence, so that the peasant and the
craftsman, the factory hand and the worker could finally have power over
the land. Then life would truly begin. Then every hand would itch for work,
and such a ringing of saws, axes and hammers would erupt across the
country that not even the clanging of every single bell could drown it out.
   Humans are curious creatures. I saw in these places around Moscow a
reflection of the misfortune that had befallen all Russia, but one thing filled
me with a secret joy – my discovery of the astonishingly vivid and direct
language of the people. Turgenev’s words that such a language could only
be given to a mighty people no longer sounded like an exaggeration, but a
simple truth.5
   Things were different in Moscow. Some people vainly argued about how
to solve the crisis, others knew how and prepared for it in silence, and still
others simply got rich. Rapacious profiteers operated on a massive scale.
The most prominent of them was perhaps the Siberian industrialist Vtorov,
a sort of Lopakhin from Chekhov’s Cherry Orchard, magnified a thousand-
fold.6
   Over this enormous swirling hive of anxiety lay the shadow of Rasputin.
Never before in all Russian history had an illiterate swindler, horse-thief
and kulak come to St Petersburg in search of easy profit and become
overnight practically the autocrat of the country, the ruler of its fate, the
right hand of the tsar, and the possessor of his own harem of court beauties.
Imperial Petersburg – the haughty Petersburg of aristocrats, cabinet
ministers, courtiers and generals – lay down at his feet like some beaten dog
hoping for a scrap from his master’s table. The country had never known
such humiliation and shame. Fateful times were upon us. Weary of the
suspense, everyone awaited the dénouement.
   It came at last. It began with Rasputin’s murder. They tossed his body
into a hole in the ice of the Malaya Nevka River. Tough as the proverbial
horse-thief, Rasputin had been poisoned, shot and drowned. According to
the doctors, his heart had kept on beating for a few minutes even after he
went down into the icy water.
   In Moscow, everything was happening at once. Thousands of Uzbeks in
green robes were marched under armed guard through the streets. An
uprising in central Asia had been crushed, and the Uzbeks were being
forcibly driven to Murmansk to die after completing the construction of the
Arctic railway. Their silver- embroidered black skullcaps were dusted with
the first dry snow of the year. The procession lasted for several days.
   Refugees from Poland, the Baltic territories and Belorussia poured into
Moscow. Their quick, sibilant accents could be heard more and more amid
the sing-song speech of the locals. Old Jews with the appearance of rabbis
walked the streets of Moscow, sheltering from the snow under their
umbrellas. Symbolist poets, having lost all connection to reality, sang of the
pale ghosts of passion and the fires of otherworldly lusts. Amid the general
confusion of ideas and sentiments, no one paid them any attention. People
didn’t have any time for them by now.
   Work back at the newspaper never slowed down, and we were busy day
and night. We spent every free minute in the editorial office, arguing,
shouting and waiting for what was to come next. Worrisome rumours
arrived from Petrograd. Visitors described grumbling bread queues, brief,
angry demonstrations in the streets and squares, and unrest in the factories.
   Not long after Rasputin’s murder, Baldy called for me. ‘Here’s the thing,’
he said. ‘I like your pieces. You have a way of capturing something . . .
something of the popular mood. So, I’ve come up with the idea of sending
you out to some God-forsaken province and you can report back on what’s
on the minds of people out in Turgenev’s Russia.’
   I agreed, and together we discussed where I might go to find the most
out-of-the-way place that wasn’t too far from Moscow. The well-known
theatre critic and Chekhov specialist Yury Sobolev, the gentlest of men
whom everyone called simply Yurochka, both to his face and behind his
back, sat in on our discussions.
   ‘Chekhov wrote that for him the little village of Yefremov in Tula
province best personified Russia’s backwater,’ said Yurochka. ‘It’s not far
from Yelets. By the way, it’s Turgenev country too. Yefremov is on the
Krasivaya Mecha River. Remember ‘Kasyan from Krasivaya Mecha’?7
That’s where you should go.’
   I arrived in Yefremov at night and sat until dawn in the station’s cold
buffet. It was painted a dirty mauve and served nothing but lukewarm tea.
The paraffin lamps smoked. A bearded policeman with jangling spurs
patrolled the station. He gave me a suspicious look every time he passed by.
As soon as it was light, I took a droshky to the town’s only hotel. In the
drab light of a winter morning, the town looked startlingly small and
shabby. The brick prison house, the distillery with its tall, thin iron chimney,
the scowling church, the rows of identical little houses (stone on the
bottom, timber on top), and the weary glow of the street lamps produced a
depressing effect. The only structure of possible interest was a row of
market stalls which had been adorned with a few columns and archways
that spoke vaguely of the past. Jackdaws circled in the dank air. The streets
stank of fresh horse manure.
   ‘So that’s it?’ I said to the driver. ‘Not much to look at.’
   ‘And why should you look at it?’ he said indifferently. ‘No one comes
here to have a look around. This ain’t Moscow.’
   ‘So, what do they come for?’
   ‘For grain and apples. We used to have the richest grain ex changes
around. The merchants had a turnover of hundreds of thousands. Our apples
are still among the best. Antonovkas, they’re called. If you’re interested,
you should go to the village of Bogovo, not far from here. I can take you
myself. Even in winter they’ve got all the apples you could want.’
   The hotel was dark and quiet. My room was dark too, even though it
faced the street, but at least it was warm. The sour smell of cabbage soup
and samovar smoke wafted up from the restaurant. The pock-marked boy
from the front desk wouldn’t leave my room and stood there staring at me,
his mouth hanging open, as though in amazement. No doubt he was having
trouble figuring out what on earth had brought me to Yefremov. I showed
him to the door. He took no offence and stopped on the way out to say:
‘You needn’t think . . . Why, we had a colonel staying with us the other day.
And now there’s a fortune teller from Moscow. Madame Troma! Skinny as
a cat. Smokes three packets of Ira cigarettes a day. Rings on every finger –
diamonds, all of them. We have something going on here all the time.
There’ll be dancing downstairs tonight. The owner’s always arranging
things. It brings in some extra money. He’s quite a man!’
   Finally, he left. I hadn’t slept since leaving Moscow and so was glad to
get undressed and into bed. It had been some time since I had felt so tired. I
was still shivering from the cold and didn’t care to move or speak. The last
thing I need is to get ill in this awful hole, I thought to myself. The idea of
being ill reminded me of what I was always trying to forget – my
loneliness. Mama and Galya far away. Romanin off at the front. Lëlya dead.
There was no one I could turn to for help if I were ill or in trouble. No one!
Hundreds of people had walked in and out of my life, but none of them had
stayed. It was painful and unjust. Or at least that’s what I thought.
   I fell asleep. I dreamed of a row of telegraph poles stretching out across a
snowy plain. I awoke, but as soon as I fell back to sleep the dream returned
– the same unbroken plain and the same telegraph poles, one after another
stretching off into the unknown for some mysterious reason. This happened
several times. In my dream I knew perfectly well that they were leading
nowhere, that there were no cities or villages up ahead, only more snow and
the dreary emptiness of the winter cold.
   I was awakened for good by a feeling that someone was nudging my bed.
I opened my eyes and, my mind still full of cobwebs, heard what sounded
like the rollicking brass clang of a fire-brigade band. The windows were
rattling. A big bass drum banged away with cheerful persistence. The dance
had begun. I got dressed and went downstairs. This was an excellent
opportunity to have my first look at the Yefremovites.
   In a poorly lit room with a low ceiling, beads of condensation dripped
from the walls. A band thundered away. Girls with tense expressions sat on
squeaky chairs and fanned themselves with their kerchiefs. In the middle of
the empty floor a haggard man in a worn coat was performing a Russian
dance. His long, melon-shaped head was covered with bristly grey hair. He
was clearly drunk, but danced with skill and flair, leaping, kicking and
shouting: ‘Ekh, Nyurka, come stop your scoldin’, you know it’s you I want
to be holdin’!’ The doorways were crowded with men, all of them rather
old, except for a few sickly youths with long necks and watery eyes.
Clearly, they were ‘white-chit boys’, unfit for military service.
   Sitting nonchalantly, one leg crossed over the other, in a prominent spot
in the room, next to a bony woman who looked as though black bugles had
been glued all over her body (I guessed this must be the fortune teller), was
a snub-nosed man with a reddish imperial and long hair that fell to the
collar of his checked raglan coat. He wore a wide-brimmed black hat and
held on his lap a walking stick with a silver knob in the shape of a naked
mermaid splayed out on a cresting wave. A bored smile on his face, the
man twirled the cane as he surveyed the room through his small pince-nez.
Upon seeing me, he got up and, careful to avoid the dancer, crossed the
room.
   ‘A thousand apologies!’ he said, removing his hat with a theatrical
flourish. ‘I see from the hotel register that you are a writer, a rare bird in
these parts. And so, please permit me, being myself what I like to call a
“confrère of the quill”, to introduce myself – I am Princess Daydream.’
   I was dumbfounded. He smiled smugly.
   ‘You never thought you would run into me in the back of beyond, did
you? My dear mother lives here. I often come to visit her from Moscow. I
find it to be a balm for body and soul.’
   Princess Daydream! Of course. I had often run across the signature in
cheap women’s magazines at end of the ‘Answers to Our Lady Readers’
Questions’ section. With expert knowledge and a rather perfumed
sentimentality, Princess Daydream gave advice on the trickiest and most
intimate questions: How do you win the love of a blond stranger? What do
you do with an unfaithful husband? What is platonic love? How do you
cure yourself of blackheads and chlorosis?
   ‘My real name’, he said, ‘is Miguel Rachinsky. Allow me to introduce
you to another guest to our town, the famous fortune teller Madame
Adelaide Tarasovna Troma.’ He introduced me to the bony woman. She
held out a claw sparkling with paste diamonds, looked me over
insouciantly, and said in a raspy voice: ‘Oh, such a fortunate young man!
Oh, a marvellous future awaits you. You were born under a lucky star.’
   She was about to say something more, but started coughing
uncontrollably, pressing a black lace handkerchief to her mouth. Her whole
body shook, and she doubled over. Through her low neckline I caught sight
of her sharp collarbone and emaciated breasts. Madame Troma could not
stop coughing and had to leave the room.
   Miguel Rachinsky invited me for a bottle of wine in the restaurant. As we
drank, he told me all there was to know about Yefremov. He began by
telling me that the drunk man was the local undertaker, a gifted dancer hired
by the proprietor ‘to entertain’ the guests and help get them out onto the
dance floor. Otherwise, the girls would just sit there like bumps on a log all
evening, waving their kerchiefs and blushing. The men would just lurk in
the doorways and then leave for home, confused as to what the whole point
of the exercise had been, while a few of them would head to the buffet to
drink and brawl until morning.
   According to him, the town lacked any sort of ‘cultural intelligentsia’,
except for Rachinsky himself and two others: Osipenko, a young man who
taught Russian literature at the girls’ school, and Bunin, an official in the
excise department and a brother of the famous writer. But Bunin was
unsociable; his only interest was sorcery – anything to do with charms,
incantations and spells.
   After that first meeting, I saw Rachinsky every day and came to realise
that his main problem was a pathological weakness for banality, conceit and
the cheap pose. He was, of course, silly, or more exactly naïve, but kind and
obliging by nature. He felt very sorry for the fortune teller, who had been
deserted by her husband and was ill with tuberculosis. She boarded with
Rachinsky’s mother, and he had insisted that she prepare special meals with
extra fat for the woman. He had apparently read somewhere that
consumptives need lots of fat ‘to lubricate their lungs’.
   His banality was incorrigible. Even in our conversations about politics
and the situation in Russia, Rachinsky always loved to attempt brilliant
displays of wit with his dubious expressions. Discussing Rasputin, he once
said that the man’s character had displayed ‘a cynicism that ascended to a
state of grace’. He shed bad verse and feeble epigrams like a moulting cat.
At home, however, he was an attentive host. The better I got to know him,
the more I pitied this slightly insane character.
   He suggested that I also board at his mother’s, and this saved my life
since the only restaurant in town, at the hotel, was a foul-smelling pothouse.
I accepted his offer and was pleasantly surprised when I first arrived to find
that his mother, a retired schoolteacher, was a most charming and intelligent
elderly woman. She regarded her dear Misha (‘Miguel’ did not exist at
home) as obviously unbalanced and was hurt by his clothes and affectations
but still she treated him with great tenderness. It was the tenderness of a
mother whose son is a freak.
   The three of us – the fortune teller, Osipenko and I – met daily for dinner
at the Rachinskys’. The schoolteacher turned out to be a fiery young man,
clever and energetic. He loved to argue, was fanatical about literature, and
wouldn’t tolerate any of Rachinsky’s ‘aesthetic quips’. Put in his place,
Rachinsky could only grin with embarrassment and polish his pince-nez. He
never dared to argue with the schoolteacher.
   The fortune teller sat wrapped up in her shawl and did not say a word.
She only liked to talk to Rachinsky’s mother, Varvara Petrovna, and then
only if the men couldn’t hear them. It seems she was ashamed of her line of
work and often arrived with tear-stained eyes. All I knew was that she had
been born in St Petersburg and her former husband was a lawyer. When she
wasn’t telling fortunes, she helped the doctors and nurses in the hospital
tending to the wounded. The hospital was just a temporary operation that
had been set up in the local parish school.
   I decided to pay a visit to the nearby village of Bogovo to see how the
peasants were getting by and what they wanted. Bogovo stood on the banks
of the Krasivaya Mecha, made famous by Turgenev. The river was covered
with ice and snow, except where the black water rushed through the mill-
race. Melting icicles dropped into the water with a loud ping. The first
February thaw had arrived, bringing with it a wet fog, blustery winds and
the smell of smoke.
   In Bogovo I had an encounter that at first struck me as simply curious,
but a few days later revealed to me a larger symbolic significance. The
peasants of Bogovo, just like all the peasants around Moscow, wanted one
thing – an end to the war. No one knew what would come next, but
everyone was certain that once it was over, life would not go back to the
way it had been. With the war over, justice would at long last be restored.
   ‘The trouble is, no one knows what justice is!’ the village cobbler, a
hollow-chested little man, said to me. ‘Travel all over Russia, ask everyone
what it is, and you’ll see that they all have their own notion of justice. It’s
different in every village! But if you could take all these notions and mix
them together, then you’d come up with a single shared idea of justice, an
all-Russian truth and justice, if you like.’
   ‘So, what’s your local truth and justice?’ I asked.
   ‘It’s right over there!’ said the cobbler, pointing at a hill across the river.
There, surrounded by a scruffy old orchard, stood a rundown manor house.
Although not large, it boasted the features of the Empire style so popular
with the nobility during the reign of Alexander I – a façade with peeling
columns; tall, narrow windows with half-moon pediments; two low semi-
circular wings; and a broken wrought-iron gate of exceptional beauty.
   ‘Will you please explain to me’, I asked, ‘what that old house has to do
with your local idea of justice?’
   ‘Just go over there, go and meet the master, then you’ll understand. See
for yourself, who you think has the right to that house, and garden, and the
five acres of land it sits on. Mind you, the master’s a bit barmy. That’d be
Shuisky. Goes about in rags. It’s unlikely he’d let you in to talk. You’ll need
to think up some sort of story first.’
   ‘What kind of story?’
   ‘Tell him you want to rent his dacha for the summer. You’ve come to talk
over the details.’
   I walked up to the house along a path largely hidden beneath the snow.
The windows were boarded up with old rotting planks. The front porch was
thick with snowdrifts. I walked around to the back and found a little door
covered with torn felt. I knocked hard. The house was deathly quiet. ‘It’s
empty,’ I said to myself, ‘no one lives here.’ Just then the door flew open.
Standing there was a wizened old man in a black quilted dressing gown
riddled with holes and belted with a towel. A little silk cap sat perched on
his head. His face was swathed in a dirty bandage, from which tufts of
cotton wool, brown from iodine, stuck out like whiskers.
   The old man gave me an angry look with his bright blue eyes and asked
in a high-pitched voice: ‘What can I do for you, sir?’
   I told him exactly what the cobbler had suggested.
   ‘You’re not a relation of the Bunins?’ he asked suspiciously.
   ‘No, certainly not!’
   ‘Then come in.’
   He led me to what must have been the only inhabited room in the house.
It was littered with rags and rubbish. A small iron stove in the middle of the
room glowed with heat. Each gust of wind blew the smoke back down the
chimney and into the room. In the corner I spied a magnificent round stove
made of glazed Dutch tiles. Nearly half the tiles were missing, and the little
holes were full of dusty medicine phials, yellowed paper bags and rotten,
worm-infested apples. Over a trestle bed covered with a mangy sheepskin
hung the portrait of a woman in a heavy gilt frame. She wore a gossamer
pale blue dress and had white powdered hair and the same blue eyes as the
old man. I had the feeling that I had somehow ended up back in Gogol’s
Russia of the early nineteenth century.
   ‘Are you a nobleman?’ the old man asked.
   I said yes, I was. It seemed like the only thing to say.
   ‘As for your present occupation, I don’t have the slightest interest,’ he
said. ‘They’ve invented such outlandish ones you can’t make head or tail of
them. Would you believe there’s now something called an Assessor of
Statutory Prices? Pure rot! It’s these Romanovs, I tell you. I’ll let you the
dacha for the summer, but only on one condition: that you don’t keep a
goat. I had that Bunin here three years ago. A most dubious character. A
real Judas! He brought goats with him, and they had a fine time nibbling on
my apple trees.’
   ‘The writer Bunin?’ I asked.
   ‘No, his brother, the tax collector. The writer’s been here too. A bit more
respectable than his brother the official, but I’ll tell you, I don’t see what he
has to be so conceited about either. Petty gentry, nothing more!’
   I decided to defend Bunin in terms the old man would understand. ‘Come
now,’ I said, ‘the Bunins are an old noble clan.’
   ‘Old?’ he asked derisively. He shook his head and shot me a look that
said I was a hopeless dimwit. ‘Old? Well, don’t you forget we’re older. My
family’s listed in the Velvet Book.8 Had you learned your Russian history
you would know just how ancient my family is.’
   Only then did I recall that the cobbler had told me the old man’s name –
Shuisky. Was it really possible that before me stood the last of the Princes
Shuisky, one of whom had been a tsar? Good Lord!
   ‘I’ll charge you fifty roubles for the entire summer,’ he went on. ‘I know
that’s a lot, but I’ve got a lot of expenses. My wife and I separated last year.
The old witch is now living in Yefremov, and I have to send her ten roubles
or so every now and then. It’s just a waste. She turns round and gives it to
her lovers. Hanging from an aspen tree would be too good for her.’
   ‘How old is she?’ I asked.
   ‘In her seventies,’ said Shuisky, angrily. ‘As for your staying here, we’ll
sign a detailed contract. It’s the only way.’
   I agreed. I had the feeling I was witnessing a rare piece of theatre.
Shuisky removed a thick yellow piece of paper embossed with a two-
headed eagle from a torn folder, picked up a quill, sharpened it with a
broken pen-knife, and dipped it in a bottle of iodine.
   ‘Damn! That ridiculous fool Vasilisa never puts anything back in its
place.’
   Vasilisa, so I learned later, was an old woman from Bogovo who used to
help make the communion bread in the local church. She came to Shuisky’s
twice a week to do a bit of tidying, chop firewood and prepare his porridge.
   Shuisky found the jar of Metamorphosis face cream in which he kept the
ink and started writing, still grumbling about what the world had come to:
‘The Russian language has gone to hell. Ridiculous new-fangled words
right and left. Might as well be speaking Tatar. Everywhere you look,
nothing but more of that Romanov nonsense. And they say Nikolashka has
invited some depraved man to dine with him at his table. Thinks he’s a tsar!
Hah! He’s no tsar, he’s a little mama’s boy!’
   ‘Why do you wrap your face in cotton wool?’ I asked.
   ‘I rub iodine on it, so naturally I have to wrap it up with cotton wool.’
   ‘But why?’
   ‘For my nerves,’ Shuisky said curtly. ‘Here you are. Read it and then sign
your name at the bottom.’
   He handed me the piece of paper written in a neat, old-fashioned hand.
There was a long list of conditions for my living on the rundown estate. I
particularly remember the first clause: ‘I, the under-signed Paustovsky, do
promise not to avail myself of any fruit from the orchard, it being
understood that said orchard, and the fruit therein, has been let to
Gavriushka Sitnikov, smallholder of the town of Yefremov.’
   I signed the utterly useless document and asked about the deposit. It
made no sense to hand over money for a house I never intended to live in,
but I had to play my role through to the end.
   ‘Deposit? What are you talking about?’ Shuisky snapped. ‘What sort of
nobleman mentions such a thing? We’ll settle up when you come back. My
regards to you. I’m sick and so won’t show you out. See to it you shut the
door firmly behind you.’
   I walked back to Yefremov. The farther away I got from Bogovo, the
more bizarre this encounter with Shuisky seemed. Upon my return Varvara
Petrovna confirmed that the old man truly was the last Prince Shuisky. True,
he had a son, but about forty years ago he had sold him for ten thousand
roubles to a childless Polish magnate. The Pole needed an heir so that after
his death his vast wealth would not be divided up among his distant
relations, and his crafty personal secretary had found for him a young boy
of excellent lineage to purchase and adopt.
   A light snow was falling. The oil lamp hissed softly. I remained at the
Rachinskys’ after dinner, reading Sergeev-Tsensky’s The Sorrow of the
Fields.9 Rachinsky sat at the dinner table writing his advice to women
readers. After he had put down a few lines, he would lean back in his chair
and read them to himself, a satisfied smile spreading across his face.
Varvara Petrovna knitted, and the fortune teller, huddled up in an armchair,
sat quietly lost in thought and staring at the diamonds on her fingers.
   All of a sudden there was a loud knocking on the window. We jumped.
The knocking was so fast and agitated that I knew something had happened.
Rachinsky went to open the door. Varvara Petrovna crossed herself. The
fortune teller was the only one of us who didn’t move. Osipenko burst into
the room wearing a hat and coat and not bothering to take off his snow-
boots.
   ‘There’s revolution in Petrograd!’ he shouted. ‘The government’s been
overthrown!’
   His voice broke. He collapsed into a chair and burst into tears. For a
moment there was nothing but silence. The only sound was Osipenko
sobbing like a child. My heart was pounding. I choked and felt tears rolling
down my cheeks.
   Rachinsky grabbed Osipenko by the shoulder. ‘When? How? Tell us!’ he
cried.
   ‘Here . . . here . . .’ Osipenko muttered, pulling a long strip of ticker tape
from his coat pocket. ‘I’ve come straight from the telegraph office . . . It’s
all right here . . .’
   I took it from him and began to read out loud the proclamation of the
Provisional Government. My hands were shaking. At last! The entire
country had known for months that something like this was coming, but it
had happened so fast and unexpectedly. But out here, in sleepy, forgotten
Yefremov, there were no signs of revolution. Moscow newspapers were few
and arrived three days late. Barking dogs and the banging of the
watchman’s clappers were the only sounds at night in the high street. It was
easy to think that nothing had changed here since the sixteenth century –
that there was no railway, no telegraph, no war, no Moscow, no history.
   And yet here it was – revolution! My mind was a confused whirl of ideas,
but one thing was clear: something tremendous had begun, something that
no one and nothing had the power to stop. The great event that people had
been awaiting for over a century had now happened, now, on this day, one
that had begun just like every other.
   ‘What should we do?’ Osipenko asked, quivering with nervous energy.
‘We’ve got to do something at once.’
   Rachinsky then said something for which all his failings could be
forgiven: ‘We’ve got to print copies of the proclamation and post them up
around town. And then get in touch with Moscow. Let’s go!’
   The three of us – Osipenko, Rachinsky and I – headed out. Only Varvara
Petrovna and the fortune teller stayed at home. As we were leaving,
Rachinsky’s mother stood in front of the icons, crossing herself and
repeating over and over, ‘At last, dear God! At last, dear God!’ The fortune
teller sat as motionless as before.
   A man came running towards us down the empty street. In the dim light
of the street lamp I could see that he was barefoot and without a hat or coat.
In one hand he held a cobbler’s boot tree. He threw himself upon us. ‘Good
people!’ he screamed and then grabbed me by the arm. ‘Have you heard?
There’s no more tsar! Now there’s only Russia!’ He gave each one of us a
hearty kiss and ran off down the street, sobbing and muttering to himself.
   ‘What’s wrong with us?’ said Osipenko. ‘Why haven’t we congratulated
each other?’ We stopped and exchanged hearty kisses ourselves. Rachinsky
then headed to the telegraph office to await news from Petrograd and
Moscow, while Osipenko and I went to find the little out-of-the-way
printer’s shop that made all the advertisements, government notices and
orders of the military governor. It was closed. We were trying to break the
lock when a man with the key came bustling up, opened the door and turned
on the light. He was the town’s only typesetter and printer. We never found
out how he happened to be in the area at that moment.
   ‘Let’s go, start sorting!’ I said.
   I dictated the text of the proclamation to the typesetter. He sorted the
type, stopping now and then to wipe the tears from his eyes. Soon we
received another message – an order from Nekrasov, the Provisional
Government’s minister of transport, addressed to every Russian to stop the
emperor’s train wherever it was.
   Events in Russia were moving with the speed of an avalanche.
   I read the first copy of the proclamation. The letters jumped and blurred
before my eyes. The printer’s office was now full of people who had
somehow heard that we were printing leaflets about the revolution. They
grabbed handfuls of them and ran out to post them on walls, fences and
lamp-posts around town. It was one o’clock in the morning, when Yefremov
was usually fast asleep. Suddenly, at this ungodly hour, the cathedral bell
rang out. It chimed once, twice and then a third time. It went on and on,
growing faster and louder, its peals waking the entire town. Soon it was
joined by the bells of the many neighbouring churches.
   Lights went on in windows throughout Yefremov. People poured onto the
streets, not bothering to shut their doors behind them. Strangers wept and
embraced each other. From the railway station came the sharp, jubilant
whistling of locomotives. Somewhere from deep among the crowded street,
voices rose, softly at first, then louder and louder, singing ‘The Workers’
Marseillaise’:

       Let us denounce the old world,
       Let us shake its dust from our feet!
   The ringing sounds of a brass band joined in with the choir of voices for
the chorus:

       Rise up, working people, and join together!
       Arise against our enemies, hungry brother!
       Let the people’s cry for vengeance be heard!
       Forward! Forward! Forward! Forward! Forward!

   On a table smeared with printer’s ink, Osipenko wrote the first Order of
the Provisional Revolutionary Committee of Yefremov. No one had set up
such a committee. No one knew who its members were, for one simple
reason: there was no such committee. Osipenko had merely decided to take
matters into his own hands and improvise:

  Pending the appointment of new civic authorities by the government of
  liberated Russia, the Provisional Revolutionary Committee of
  Yefremov calls upon all citizens to remain calm and orders as follows:
     The administration of the urban and rural districts will be the
  responsibility of the District Executive Board led by its chairman,
  Citizen Kushelëv.
     Citizen Kushelëv is hereby named Government Commissar until
  further notice.
     Police and gendarmerie will immediately surrender their arms to the
  District Executive Board.
     A People’s Militia will be formed to ensure order in the streets.
     The work of all government departments and private businesses will
  continue.
     The garrison quartered in Yefremov will take the oath of allegiance
  to the new government following the example set by the garrisons of
  Petrograd, Moscow and other cities across Russia.

   Rachinsky, exhausted and pale yet resolute, turned up at the printer’s
office at dawn. He now had an enormous red bow on his coat. Approaching
the table, he threw down a policeman’s hat and a holstered Nagant revolver.
The railway workers had disarmed the bearded policeman and Rachinsky,
who had witnessed it, had brought these back as trophies to the
revolutionary committee.
    Rachinsky was then followed by a tall, white-haired man with a gentle,
confused expression – the new commissar of the Provisional Government,
Kushelëv. He never even asked how he had been appointed to this
important position. A new proclamation was quickly put out with his
signature congratulating the town’s inhabitants on Russia’s liberation from
centuries of oppression. A meeting of representatives of every social class
and organisation was set for one o’clock that day to discuss urgent matters
in light of the recent events. After signing the proclamation, Kushelëv wept.
Never in my life have I seen so many tears of joy as in those days.
    His daughter, a tall, shy girl in a short coat and a shawl, had come with
him. As he was signing the document, she stroked his head and said in a
quivering voice: ‘Calm down, Papa, there’s no need to get so overwrought.’
As a young man Kushelëv had spent ten years in exile in the far north for
his membership of a revolutionary students’ group.
    We entered into a period of happy days full of noise and confusion. A
general meeting open to all citizens continued around the clock at the office
of the District Executive Board. The board was renamed the Convention. Its
office steamed with the breath of hundreds. Red flags fluttered in the
February wind. Villagers poured into town for the latest news and
directives. ‘When will there be word about land for the peasants?’ they
asked. The streets around the board’s office were crowded with carts and
littered with straw. Everywhere, people were debating and arguing about
land, compensation and peace. Elderly men with red armbands and
revolvers on their belts – the People’s Militia – patrolled the road junctions.
Staggering news kept arriving. Nicholas had abdicated the throne at the
railway station in Pskov. Passenger rail traffic throughout the entire country
had been stopped.
    Prayers were said in Yefremov’s churches for the new government.
Convicts were released from prison, schools were closed, and excited pupils
ran about the town delivering the commissar’s orders and notices. On the
fifth or sixth day I met my cobbler friend from Bogovo. He told me that
upon learning of the revolution, Shuisky had begun preparing to move into
town. He put a ladder up to his tiled stove, climbed to the top, pulled out a
bag of gold coins, climbed down, fell, and died that evening. The cobbler
had come to hand Shuisky’s money over to the commissar of the
Provisional Government.
   It seemed as though the town and its people had been transformed.
Russia had found its voice and begun to speak. Even in tongue-tied
Yefremov inspiring orators appeared out of nowhere. Most of them were
railway workers. They reduced the listening women to tears. Gone were the
cowed, sullen expressions. The faces of the people of Yefremov looked
younger, their eyes shone with goodness and the joy of a new beginning.
They were no longer subjects. They were citizens now. And as though by
decree, the weather was fine. The days were sunny, the flags snapped in the
warm breeze, and white clouds sailed joyfully over the town. You could feel
the breath of early spring all around you, in the heavy blue shadows and in
the raw nights alive with the noise of people.
   I was dazed, intoxicated. I could not imagine what would happen next. I
longed to head back to Moscow, but the trains had stopped running.
   ‘Wait,’ Osipenko said to me, ‘this is only the beginning of great things to
come for Russia. Try to keep a cool head and a warm heart. You need to
preserve your strength.’
   Commissar Kushelëv signed a pass for me and I left for Moscow on the
first possible train. No one saw me off. There was no time for that now. The
train was slow. I couldn’t sleep. I sat thinking about the past few years,
going over them in my mind month by month and trying to locate some
unifying thread to my life. Try as I might, however, I couldn’t. There was
one thing that I did know for certain. I had never once during these years
given any thought to my comfort or material well-being. I had known only
one passion – to become a writer. Now, travelling that night on the train to
Moscow, I became aware that I was at last at the point of being able to put
into words what I understood by beauty and justice, to express and to
communicate to others my perception of life, my vision of human
happiness, dignity and freedom. This, I realised, was my life’s purpose.
Only now was I able to see it clearly.
   I didn’t know what would come next. But I knew that I would continue to
strive with all my strength to become a writer. This would be my way of
serving my people, of loving our magical language and our remarkable
land. I would work as long as I could hold a pen and my heart, overflowing
with the beauty of life, was still beating.
   At dawn on a misty March day, I finally arrived in Moscow, this jubilant,
seething, harrowing city. I had long believed that life held out before me the
promise of many remarkable things – joys, struggles, loves, sorrows and
tragedies – and this presentiment had been the great happiness of my youth.
Then I could not be certain the promise would be fulfilled. Now, time had
proved me right.


1Titular character of a story by Gogol (1835, revised in 1842) about a
Cossack warrior and his two sons.
2Alexander Kuprin (1870–1938), writer of short fiction, novelist, friend of
Chekhov and Bunin.
3Vladimir Gilyarovsky (1853–1935), poet, actor, raconteur, journalist and
memoirist, known for his writings on Moscow.
4 The ‘Time of Troubles’ was a period of political instability, famine and
foreign invasion between 1598 and 1613.
5Turgenev’s winged words of 1882 on ‘the great, mighty, true and free
Russian language that could have been given only to “a great people”’.
6 Nikolai Vtorov (1866–1916), immensely wealthy entrepreneur and
banker, known as the ‘Russian Morgan’.
7A reference to the story ‘Kasyan of the Beautiful Lands’ in Turgenev’s A
Sportsman’s Sketches (1852).
8 An official seventeenth-century registry, bound in red velvet, of Russia’s
aristocratic elite.
9 Sergei Sergeev-Tsensky (1875–1958), prolific writer, poet and author of
this 1909 work on the plight of rural Russia.

                             OceanofPDF.com
Book Three


THE DAWN OF AN UNCERTAIN AGE

                OceanofPDF.com
70
Whirlpool



In the course of a few months, Russia said everything that it had kept to
itself for centuries. Day and night, from February until the autumn of 1917,
the entire country seethed from end to end like one continuous, raucous
meeting. Crowds of people shouted in city squares, in front of monuments,
in railway stations smelling of chlorine, in factories, villages and markets,
and in every courtyard and stairway of every house. Oaths, appeals,
denunciations, heated oratory – all this would suddenly be drowned out in
furious shouts of ‘Down with him!’ or in hoarse, ecstatic cries of ‘Hurrah!’
The noise rumbled, like the thunder of heavy carts over cobblestones, from
street to street.
   The meetings in Moscow were particularly heated and inspired. Someone
was always being tossed up in the air or pulled down off the Pushkin
Monument by the belt of his greatcoat or kissed by men with bristly cheeks
or extended a friendly greeting by a pair of calloused hands. An intelligènt
had his hat knocked off one minute only to be raised up triumphantly the
next by the anonymous crowd. While holding onto his wobbly pince-nez,
he hurled curses upon unnamed enemies of Russia’s freedom. All around
came frenzied outbursts of clapping that sounded like the drumming of hail
on the pavement. Indeed, the spring of 1917 was cold, and hard little balls
of hail often covered the young grass along the city’s boulevards.
   No one ever asked for permission to speak at these meetings. Everyone
assumed they already had it. Front-line soldiers were sure of a ready
hearing, as was a Frenchman by the name of Jacques Sadoul, an officer,
member of the French Socialist Party, later a communist, who was stranded
at the time in Russia. His light blue greatcoat was always moving back and
forth between Moscow’s two busiest meeting places – the monuments to
Pushkin and Skobelev. Any soldier who claimed to be back from the front
was first put through a noisy interrogation: ‘Which front? What division?’
voices shouted from the crowd. ‘What regiment? Who was your regimental
commander?’ If the soldier got confused amid the tumult and was slow to
answer, someone yelled, ‘The front all right! He’s been defending
Khodynka Field right here in Moscow! Get him out of here!’ They would
drag him from the rostrum, and the man would be swallowed up by the
crowd.
   A formidable tactic was needed to win the crowd over and hold its
attention. Once, a bearded soldier in a greatcoat as stiff as tree bark climbed
up onto the pedestal of the Pushkin Monument. ‘What division? What
unit?’ people yelled at him.
   The soldier scowled angrily. ‘What are ya all shoutin’ about?’ he roared
back. ‘Bet if I looked, I’d find a photograph of Wilhelm in every third
man’s pocket. A good half of you are spies! And that’s a fact! Who the hell
are you to tell a Russian soldier to shut up?’
   That was a formidable tactic. The crowd fell silent.
   ‘You go and feed lice in the trenches like I have,’ he bellowed, ‘then you
can ask questions! Tsarist scum! Bastards! Just because you’ve put on those
red ribbons, don’t kid yourselves you’re fooling us. It’s not enough you’re
selling us out to the bourgeoisie like we’re a bunch of market chickens, no,
you’re gonna pluck us of every last feather too, eh? It’s ’cause of the likes
of you there’s treason at the front and all over this rotten land of ours.
Comrades, all you soldiers from the front! It’s you I’m talking to now! Do
me a favour, don’t let any of those citizens over there leave. Search ’em and
check their papers. If anybody’s got anything on him, we’ll deal with him
ourselves. We don’t need any government commissar to tell us what we can
do! Hurrah!’
   The soldier tore off his hat and waved it over his head. There were a few
scattered cheers of ‘Hurrah!’ but nothing more. Then an ominous
movement started in the crowd – soldiers, linking arms, began to encircle it.
Who knows how this would have ended if someone hadn’t thought to notify
the Soviet of Deputies, which sent a lorry full of armed workers to restore
order.
   Gradually, the meetings in the various parts of Moscow assumed their
own distinct character. The speakers at the Skobelev Monument were
chiefly representatives of the different political parties – from the Kadets
and the Popular Socialist Party to the Bolsheviks. The speeches here were
heated, but serious. No one was allowed to spout twaddle in front of
Skobelev. The moment a speaker tried something like that, the crowd yelled
in one voice: ‘To hell with you! You belong over at Taganskaya Square!’
There you could indeed say whatever you had on your mind, be it that
Kerensky1 was a converted Jew from the village of Shpola or that the
monks at the Donskoy Monastery had been caught hiding a hundred
thousand gold roubles in the hollowed-out cores of pickled apples.
   One day that spring (it was already May, but no one seemed to have
noticed that the ice had gone out on the Moscow River or that the bird-
cherries were blooming), I stood in the crowd in front of the Skobelev
Monument. A scuffle had broken out between the SRs and the Bolsheviks.
All of a sudden, up climbed Rachinsky onto the pedestal. I literally jumped
with surprise. I had never before seen Rachinsky in Moscow. He removed
his wide-brimmed velours hat, raised his stick with the silver naked
mermaid up high, called for silence, and cried out in a voice overflowing
with pathos: ‘Black clouds seek to erase the radiant sun of our freedom!
Permit me, a poor, humble poet living in a garret, to lift up my indignant
voice . . .’
   ‘Chuck him in the dump!’ came a clear and determined although rather
coarse voice from the crowd.
   ‘Off to Taganskaya with you!’ the crowd shouted all together. ‘You, up
there, whoever’s closest, pull him down!’
   ‘This is usurpation!’ Rachinsky cried desperately. ‘The voice of the
senseless rabble!’
   This made no difference, and he was not allowed to go on. Raising his
eyes dolefully to the heavens, Rachinsky shrugged his shoulders, and then,
preserving his dignity, hopped down from the pedestal and disappeared into
the crowd.
   The meetings at the Pushkin Monument addressed all sorts of issues but,
as it is now popular to say, always remained ‘on a high level’. The speakers
here were typically students. I was then working for a different newspaper
and had to attend the meetings as part of my job. The meetings revealed the
slightest shifts in the mood of Muscovites, and we journalists could always
pick up lots of news at them.
   My newspaper had the strange name of the Moscow Municipality
Gazette. The Moscow municipality no longer existed, nor did any such
gazette speaking on its behalf. It’s possible the name came from the fact
that the editorial offices had been set up in the building that had once
belonged to the Moscow municipal governor on Tverskoy Boulevard. It
was a small paper edited by ‘Don Aminado’, a light-minded, carefree poet-
journalist. No one knew his real name.
   The paper published telegrams with earth-shattering news that arrived
from all over the country, a chronicle of Moscow life, and, now and then,
orders issued by Dr Kishkin, commissar of the Provisional Government. No
one ever even considered carrying out these orders, and so the figure of Dr
Kishkin became merely ornamental. He was a dry stick of a man with a
greying beard and the eyes of a martyr awaiting the unavoidable end. He
went about in an elegant frock coat with silk lapels and a red cockade in his
buttonhole.
   With each passing day the speeches of the orators became more clearly
defined, and from the confusion of slogans and demands two camps began
to emerge that reflected the main division within the country: that of the
Bolsheviks and workers and that of the Provisional Government’s
supporters, mostly the well-intentioned but spineless and distraught
intelligentsia. True, not all of the intelligentsia sided with the new
government, but most of it did.

                                      •

The state was disintegrating like a pile of wet sand. The provinces refused
to submit to Petrograd’s authority. They lived their own separate life, no
one knew how, and struggled with their own seething turmoil. At the front,
the army was melting fast. Kerensky dashed about the country, trying to
hold it together with his ecstatic eloquence. Lacking clear ideas and
conviction, all he could offer instead were pompous phrases, operatic poses
and grandiloquent but irrelevant gestures. Thus, he appeared on the parapets
of the trenches to harangue thousands of soldiers at the front, never once
realising how utterly ridiculous he looked. Once he tore off the epaulettes of
a sick, elderly soldier who had refused to return to the trenches and then,
pointing authoritatively to the east as though he were a Roman emperor,
screamed at the man: ‘You coward! Back to the rear! We will not kill you –
your conscience will do that for us!’ He uttered these words in a tragic
voice, tears in his eyes, while the soldiers simply turned their backs on him
and cursed.
   I often encountered this man with his puffy, greenish face, crimson
eyelids and thin, greying crew-cut. He walked with headlong speed, forcing
his aides to chase after him, and would then stop and turn round just as
quickly, frightening them. He carried his wounded right arm in a black sling
outside his rumpled field jacket, which lay in pleats across his stomach.
Shiny brown leggings creaked and glistened on his long, thin legs.
   In a barking staccato, he tossed clipped phrases at the crowd and then
paused, as though out of breath. Not only did he love noisy words, he
believed in them. He believed they could fly, like a tocsin, out over the
agitated country and inspire the people to glory and sacrifice. Having
uttered these noisy words, Kerensky would collapse into his armchair,
sobbing and shaking, as his aides rushed to give him a sedative. He reeked
of essence of valerian like some nervous woman. That smell, which brought
to mind the fusty air of old-fashioned apartments, gave him away. Or, at
least it did to me at the time. For some reason I was convinced that
medicinal smells like this were incompatible with the high calling of a
champion of the people.
   I soon realised that Kerensky was nothing more than a sick man with a
large streak of Dostoevskyism in him. He was an actor who believed in his
great messianic calling, unaware he was rushing blindly over a precipice.
This hysteric, carried along on the crest of the first wave of the revolution
like so much froth, was undoubtedly honest in his aggrandised convictions
and his devotion to Russia. Since the days of old Muscovy, Russia has had
its share of holy fools, and there was something of them in Kerensky.
   I happened to see most of the leaders of the February Revolution.
Although I had trouble making sense of the confusing situation of those
days, nonetheless I was struck by the disparity of these men. Foreign
Minister Milyukov, a lordly professor of history, had nothing in common
with Kerensky. His bluish-silver hair looked sterilised and icy, just like the
rest of him, all the way down to his every measured, correct word. In those
turbulent times, he was like a visitor from some other well-organised,
academic planet.
   A large herd of soap-box orators appeared overnight. They sprang up like
mushrooms after rain. The most important thing was to shout louder than
your opponent. Cheap demagoguery found a receptive, well-manured soil.
Orators were even imported from abroad. Albert Thomas, French minister
of armaments, arrived from Paris. He came to persuade the ‘heroic Russian
people’ to remain a loyal ally and stay in the war. A short-legged man with
a reddish beard and an elegant frock coat, he displayed in his speeches a
peerless example of the art of shrillness and the expressive gesture. I once
heard him speak from the balcony of what is now the Moscow Soviet (then
the residence of the commissar of the Provisional Government). Thomas
spoke in French to a crowd of mostly soldiers and workers from the
suburbs. No more than a dozen or so of them could have known the
language, but you didn’t need to speak French to understand what Thomas
was saying.
   Prancing up and down the balcony on his fat little legs, Thomas
presented a pantomime of what, in his opinion, would happen to Russia if it
left the war. He twisted his moustache like the kaiser’s, he squinted
rapaciously, he leapt into the air and grabbed the throat of an imaginary
Russia. Holding it in a death grip, he hissed, and trampled and kicked it
with his polished boots to the accompaniment of war cries and the snarls of
an enraged tiger. Wilhelm’s terrifying dance over the prostrate body of
Russia went on for several minutes. Stupefied by this circus act, the crowd
held its breath.
   Then a hollow sort of roar could be heard building among the crowd.
Thomas wiped his red face with a scented handkerchief and with a flick of
the wrist put his glossy top hat back on at its usual jaunty angle. He listened
to the crowd and smiled. In that roar he was convinced he heard approval.
   The roar grew louder, and as it did it grew more threatening, until it
reached the point where cries of ‘Shame! Clown! Down with him!’ could
be heard, followed by shrill whistling. Someone kindly approached
Thomas, took him by the arm, and escorted him off the balcony. Next, out
came the Belgian Socialist Vandervelde, a man with an insufferably ascetic
face and a clerical coat buttoned to the neck. He started to speak quietly,
without intonation, chewing his words with his thin, dry lips. It seemed he
wanted to put the crowd to sleep, and it did indeed thin out until only a
handful of people were left below the balcony, listening, apparently, out of
politeness. Vandervelde said the same thing as Thomas. In a half-hearted
way he called for loyalty to ‘our holy military alliance’.
   Music could be heard coming from the direction of the Strastnoy
Monastery. It grew louder and began to thunder:

       From the people we’ve come,
       Children of toil, one and all,
       ‘Fraternal alliance and freedom’
       Is our rallying call!

   Columns of workers from the Presnya district approached down
Tverskaya Street. Banners of red calico fluttered past Vandervelde
demanding ‘Peace to the Huts, War on the Palaces!’ and ‘All Power to the
Soviets!’ and ‘End the War!’ Vandervelde moved his lips for a few more
minutes, then folded up his notes and slowly walked off, leaning not on a
stick but his umbrella, neatly rolled and protected by a silk sleeve. None of
the workers noticed him. They sang as they walked:

       Everything on which the throne stands –
       By the workers was it done . . .
       We’ve cast bullets with our hands,
       And we’ll fix the bayonet to our gun!

   Looking back today, after so many years, on the first months of the
revolution, one begins to understand how unstable and filled with a sense of
unavoidable impending change they were. The old order had been
destroyed. But deep down in our souls, few of us believed that the collapse
of the monarchy meant that the revolution was complete. The new February
regime was, of course, nothing more than an interlude in Russian history.
   Perhaps the transient leaders of the country understood this at the time,
and this weakened their resistance to the new future, hostile to them but
inevitable, that future announced by Lenin from atop the armoured car
outside the Finland station: ‘The dawn of the world socialist revolution has
already begun!’ It turned out that all that had been so easily achieved and
hastily put together after February was nothing but the very first steps of a
new age. This became clear to everyone only much later. At the time, we
were only vaguely aware of this. The times were too charged, too many
fantastic things were happening every day. We didn’t have the inner
strength, or the time, to make sense of history moving at lightning speed.
The thunder produced by the collapse of the old world was a continuous
roar in our ears. The idyllic generosity of the first days of the revolution
faded. Whole worlds crumbled and collapsed into dust.
   Nearly the entire intelligentsia – heirs of the great, humanistic Russian
tradition of Pushkin and Herzen, Tolstoy and Chekhov – found itself
overwhelmed and confused. It became indisputably clear that although the
intelligentsia had been capable of creating high spiritual values, it found
itself, with few exceptions, powerless to lay the foundations of a new state.
Russian culture had largely grown up in the struggle for freedom against
autocracy. This struggle had defined the intelligentsia’s thinking, it had set
the course for the development of noble aspirations and civic courage. With
the old order in ruins, its task was no longer to sow among the people
textbook notions of ‘the good, the rational, the eternal’, but to build a new
social order, immediately and with their own hands, to govern skilfully this
vast and utterly neglected country.
   The country’s troubled, almost unimaginable condition could not go on
for long. The very survival of the people demanded a clear purpose and a
channelling of energies. The establishment of justice and freedom, it turned
out, required hard work and even ruthlessness. Such things, we learned, do
not come of themselves in response to the clashing of cymbals and the
rapturous cheers of the citizens.
   These were the first lessons of the revolution. For the first time, the
Russian intelligentsia was brought face to face with its own ideals. It was a
bitter pill to swallow, and no one could let it pass. The strong downed it and
took their place alongside the people. The weak either degenerated or
perished. Thus began the long and formidable era of creating a new civic
order. But, again, at that time few people had thought these matters through
to the end – they were little more than feelings, the first inklings of larger
ideas. Most people drifted along with the current of events, wishing just to
survive, if only a bit longer, so they might witness the course of history and
catch a glimpse of the shore to which Russia would eventually be driven.
   As for me, I had greeted the February Revolution with a schoolboy’s
delight, even though I was already twenty-five years old. I naïvely believed
that overnight this revolution could make us all into better people and turn
the bitterest of enemies into friends. I thought that for the sake of the
revolution’s incontrovertible gains people would reject the unworthy
remnants of the past – all that was mean and shabby and particularly the
lust for wealth, national enmity and the oppression of one’s fellow man.
   I had always been certain that there was an innate goodness in all of us, a
goodness that merely needed to be summoned from the depths of our being.
But I soon learned that these starry-eyed notions were little more than dust
and ashes. Every day cruel evidence was rubbed in my face that people are
not so easily changed and that the revolution had yet to eliminate hatred or
distrust. I drove this unpleasant thought away, but it refused to leave and
poisoned my happiness. I became increasingly angry. I felt a special anger
for those polished, liberal intelligènty who, in my opinion, allowed their ill-
will towards the people, over whom they had so recently been in ecstasy, to
make them stupider by the day. That did not mean, however, that I was
ready to fully embrace the October Revolution. I agreed with much, but
much I rejected, especially what seemed to me its contempt for the culture
of the past.
   Prevented by my idealistic upbringing from whole-heartedly accepting
the October Revolution, I lived through the first two or three years not as a
participant, but a deeply interested onlooker. Not until 1920 did I realise
that there was no other path forward than the one chosen by my people. At
once, I felt relief. There followed a time of faith and great hopes. My life
gained meaning and purpose, and from then on I devoted it, more or less, to
serving the people in the best way I knew how – through my writing. No
one can say whether it is better to arrive at conviction through doubt or
never to have doubted at all. Regardless, what always seemed to me to be
required of everyone in our revolutionary age was a profound commitment
to freedom, justice and humanity, together with honesty towards oneself.

                                       •

The cold spring of 1917 was followed by a sweltering summer. A hot wind
blew clouds of torn and crumpled newspapers along the pavements. Almost
every day new papers appeared in Moscow, sometimes of the most unusual
orientations, such as those of the theosophists or the anarchists, whose
slogan was ‘Anarchy breeds order’. Noisy and largely illiterate, most of
these papers lasted only a few days. The wind tugged at the posters –
accusatory, denunciatory or calming – that covered the walls. The air
smelled of printers’ ink and rye bread.
   The army had brought the village smell of bread with them. Ignoring
Kerensky’s shrill orders, the city filled with soldiers pouring in from the
front. Moscow had become a noisy army camp. The streets and squares
around the railway stations thronged with soldiers. The harsh smoke from
their cheap makhorka cigarettes hung in the air over their makeshift
quarters, giving Moscow the aura of a conquered city. The wind scattered
flurries of chalky sunflower shells from one end of the square to the other.
A red flag, tied to the martially raised bronze sword of Skobelev’s
monument, had long since faded in the sun but still waved triumphantly in
the wind.
   A mantle of dust lay over the city. Yellow street lamps burned sleepily
both day and night. No one had remembered to put them out. To reduce the
demand for electricity, the government decreed that the clocks be set back.
Sunset was now at four o’clock in the afternoon. The whole city was on its
feet. Flats stood empty. All night long people talked themselves hoarse at
meetings, dragged themselves half asleep through the streets, or sat and
argued in the squares and on the pavement. Strangers, thrown together at
meetings, became either friends or enemies in an instant. Months had
passed since the beginning of the revolution, but the excitement was as
great as ever. The anxiety proved exhausting.
   I decided to go and visit Mama late that summer. Life in Moscow had
worn me out. During all that time I hadn’t managed to read a thing other
than a mass of hastily printed pamphlets, which reflected the implacable
struggle among the various political parties. I dreamed of doing something
impossible, like having the time to reread Tolstoy’s War and Peace. Now, it
seemed to me as if the novel had been written a couple of centuries ago.
Mama was living with Galya in Polesia, not far from the town of
Chernobyl. My Aunt Vera from Kiev had a small estate there, Kopan, and
Mama had agreed to live at Kopan and try to make some improvements.
Mama loved anything to do with the land. At one time she had even
dreamed of having me train to be an agronomist.
   I passed through Kiev. Like Moscow, the whole city was one endless,
seething meeting. The only difference was that the slogans were shouted in
Ukrainian and instead of ‘The Workers’ Marseillaise’ they sang ‘Never
Perished Is Ukraine’ and Shevchenko’s ‘My Testament’.
   I sailed along the Dnieper and Pripyat to Chernobyl on the Volodya, a
small steamer that had lost a good deal of its paint. It was a most
conscientious boat. Every now and then the captain, a Ukrainian with a dull
moustache and a red ribbon on his chest, clambered up to the bridge and
shouted, a smile on his face, through to the engine room: ‘Come on now,
Volodya! Give it all you’ve got! Do your part for the revolution!’ And the
Volodya did. With all its might, puffing clouds of steam and hurriedly
slapping the water with its paddles, it picked up speed. But this didn’t last
for long. Soon the paddles once more lazily dipped into the water, and then
the good-natured passengers stretched themselves out to rest on the deck,
the sweet smell of marsh tea drifted from the banks, and the chirring of the
grasshoppers faded into a soothing hum. I, too, dozed on the deck. From
here, Moscow seemed nothing more than a strange dream.
   It was forty versts by horse and cart through pine forests and heavy sand
from Chernobyl to Kopan. The horses plodded along. The wheels creaked,
the old harness smelled of tar. The driver, a little old man in a shabby brown
coat, kept asking me: ‘Still no news, is there, begging your pardon, of
course, back in Moscow when we’ll get the universal permission?’
   ‘What permission?’
   ‘For us peasant folk to take the land for ourselves and drive all the
masters to the devil with our pitchforks. We’ve heard it said it’s that
Kerensky who’s stopping us. We’ll drive a stake through him too if it’s the
truth!’
   Kopan turned out to be less of a manor and more of a rundown farm. In a
clearing in the forest stood a large old farmhouse with a rotting thatched
roof and a few ramshackle outbuildings. There wasn’t even a fence. The
woods hemmed the house in on all sides. After the commotion of Moscow,
I found the soughing of the pines especially majestic and calming.
   When we met, Mama’s lips quivered and she choked up, although she
managed to hold held back her tears. She threw her arms around me and
pressed her grey head to my shoulder. We stood like this for a long time,
Mama straining not to cry. She had never clung to me before in this way, as
though I were the older of us two, her protector and the only comfort in her
unfortunate life. Galya held me tightly by my elbow, tears streaming from
under her thick spectacles. She didn’t think to wipe them away. I made a
clumsy attempt to comfort Mama. I had thought of her often while I was
away, but only now did I understand that life had left her nothing other than
her bitter, deeply hidden love for the last two people she still had – Galya
and me. It was these few crumbs of love that kept her alive. And it was for
the sake of this love that she silently put up with the indignities of her rich
relations, the back-breaking work and the complete isolation of these empty
forests.
   At dusk, Mama mentioned apologetically that it was now no longer
possible to get paraffin – even in Chernobyl – so she and Galya spent their
evenings by the light of a simple torch made of splintered pine. I had never
seen such a thing before and rather liked its bright, crimson light. Picking at
the fringe of her shawl with her hands, now dry and rough from working the
earth, Mama said tentatively: ‘Kostik, it would be so wonderful if you’d
stay here with us for good. These are dangerous times. It’d be good to be
together. We’d manage. True, we’ve got nothing to eat but potatoes and
lard, but at least we’d have each other. What do you think, Kostik?’
   She couldn’t bring herself to look me in the face, and so kept her eyes
lowered. I said nothing. Mama placed a fresh pine torch in the iron clamp.
Her hands were shaking. ‘Galya and I talked it over,’ she said, not turning
round, ‘and if you’re still set on becoming a writer then it doesn’t matter
where you live. It’s quiet here. And no one will disturb you.’
   I had to say something. ‘I’ll think it over,’ I replied.
   Mama came over and stroked my head. ‘Oh, that’s good,’ she said, a sad
smile on her face. ‘That’s good. Do that, Kostik, give it some thought.’

                                       •

No matter how long you live, Russia never ceases to amaze. For me, this
amazement began in my childhood and it’s still with me today. I know of no
other country so full of surprises and contradictions. I became more
convinced of this than ever the day after my arrival in Kopan.
   I was telling Mama and Galya about life in Moscow since the revolution
when I looked through the window and saw coming out of the woods
towards the house an ancient, hunchbacked little monk in a dusty cassock
and with a worn skufia on his head. He came in, crossed himself facing the
empty corner where the icon should have been, bowed to us, and then asked
Mama whether she would take some of his dried mushrooms in exchange
for salt for the brethren. He seemed to have stepped out of the Russia from
the time before Peter the Great.
   Mama had salt. She poured out a quarter of a bag for the monk but didn’t
take his mushrooms. In this wooded area, there were more mushrooms than
people knew what to do with. She offered the monk tea. He sat at the table,
not removing his skull-cap and sipping his tea through a lump of sugar. A
few tears trickled down his cheeks, which were as yellow as church
candles. He carefully wiped them away with the edge of his cassock and
said: ‘So the Lord has granted me to drink tea with sugar one last time
before I die. Truly, the Lord has shown me mercy. He has deigned to show
pity on my poor cold bones.’
   Mama went to fetch something in the next room. I followed and asked
her where the monk had appeared from. She said that for ages now there
had been a small monastery deep in the woods on the banks of the river Uzh
about ten versts from Kopan. Since the revolution, most of the younger
monks had left and only a few frail elders remained. ‘You should go and
have a look,’ she said. ‘Talk to them. You might find it of interest.’
   A few days later I visited the monastery. The woods were dark and
cluttered with fallen trees. There, in the middle of the forest with no
clearing around, I came upon a tall stockade of blackened logs. I had seen
such stockades in paintings of old monastic settlements by Roerich2 and
Nesterov. I walked along the outside until I came to the gate. It was barred.
I knocked for a long time until it was opened by the same monk who had
come for salt. I walked into a courtyard overgrown with grass and saw a
small crooked church built of rough-hewn pine logs. I felt as though I had
stumbled back into ancient Muscovy. Old men could be heard chanting in
the church. Now and then a muffled clang came from the belfry.
   ‘We don’t know if we should ring it or not,’ the monk said to me. ‘We’re
afraid. Maybe it will offend the new authorities. So, we ring the bell ever so
softly. It wouldn’t even frighten a crow off the belfry it’s so quiet. Do come
in.’
   We entered the church. No more than three or four candles were burning.
Old men in black monastic robes embroidered with white crosses and skulls
stood motionless. Their narrow faces glowed like darkened gold in the half-
light. There was the slightly bitter smell of burned juniper berries, which
the monks used instead of incense.
   Overwhelmed by it all, I felt my mind become a confused jumble of
impressions and memories – this ancient monastery, the mournful chanting,
the wind in the pines, the skulls on the robes, Moscow, the cross on Lëlya’s
grave, the lice-infested soldiers in the trenches, the synagogue in Kobrin,
the lighthouse in Taganrog, meetings, revolution, ‘La Marseillaise’,
Kerensky, ‘Peace to the Huts, War on the Palaces!’ The fantastic, patchwork
course of my life seemed like some strange dream. The only constant in it
had been the unending expectation of change.
   How was I to make sense of it? Was there anything in this chaos I could
use for some serious, constructive purpose? And how was I to explain to
myself the fact that I could side with the revolution, support the most
progressive ideas and love Heine while at the same time feeling completely
at home here in this relic of medieval Russia, with the monks’ quivering
voices singing of man’s hope for heaven’s blessing, ‘as it was in the
beginning, is now and ever shall be’? And why is it whenever I hear those
words I recall these lines – ‘My grief lowers its string of fine pearls into the
forged coffer . . .’3 The lines from this poem seemed like some
contemporary echo of the monks’ chants. I left the monastery and struggled
for a long time to make sense of all these things. After that, I liked to visit
the monastery whenever I went to fish on the river Uzh. The monks treated
me to old mead and cold water.
   Newspapers never reached us, so I had to ride all the way to Chernobyl
on a horse with a bad leg. I managed to do this only once and brought back
with me to Kopan news of the Kornilov affair4 and the fall of Riga to the
Germans. Mama refused to let me go after that. A mysterious gang had
appeared in the woods – either escaped Austrian prisoners of war or
convicts released from jail. No one had actually seen the gang, but everyone
was on edge.
   Time passed. Nothing more had been heard of the gang for a long time,
and things quietened down. At the end of the autumn I finally left for Kiev
and from there for Moscow. Mama made me promise to return the
following spring. By the time I left Polesia, the leaves had dried and turned
yellow and the woods were wreathed in mist. A week after my departure, a
gang descended on the monastery. The bandits tore up the cells looking for
silver, shot all the monks and then set fire to the church. But the centuries
had petrified its timber, so the church was only charred and did not burn to
the ground.


1Alexander Kerensky (1881–1970), lawyer, member of the SRs, served as
minister of justice, minister of war and then last prime minister of the
Provisional Government.
2 Nicholas Roerich (1873–1947), artist, writer, theosophist known for his
paintings of Russia’s distant past.
3Lines from a poem by Olga Belyaevskaya (active in the early 1900s), used
by the Russian Symbolist Vyacheslav Ivanov (1866–1949) as an epigraph to
his poem ‘Under the Birch Tree’ (1906).
4 A failed military coup d’état led by General Lavr Kornilov against the
Provisional Government in September 1917.

                           OceanofPDF.com
71
Blue Torches



In Moscow I found lodgings in a two-storey house near Nikitsky Gate. It
faced three streets: Tverskoy Boulevard, Bolshaya Nikitskaya Street and
Leontievsky Lane. The fourth side of the house abutted the thick firewall of
a six-storey block of flats. Across the road, at the corner of Tverskoy
Boulevard (where the Timiryazev Monument now stands), was a long, plain
building that housed a chemist’s shop and had a cellar loaded with the
shop’s supplies. The windows of my room on the first floor looked out onto
the chemist’s. These details about the house and its location are necessary
for making sense of the unusual events that were to come.
   One autumn night, hazy with smoke and frost, I woke up with the strange
sensation that all the air had suddenly been sucked out of my room. For a
few seconds I thought I had gone deaf. I climbed out of bed. The floor was
covered with shattered glass from the windows. The shards shone in the
light of the misty moon drifting high in the sky over slumbering Moscow.
The deathly quiet was broken by what sounded like a brief clap of thunder.
Something flew past my windows with a loud screech followed
immediately by a long, slow rumble as the corner of the house facing
Nikitsky Gate collapsed. Children started crying in the landlord’s flat.
   At the time there was no way of knowing that a gun placed at the base of
the Pushkin Monument was firing directly at Nikitsky Gate. This we were
to learn only later. After this second shot the silence returned. The moon
was still staring down attentively from the misty night sky at the broken
glass on my floor. A few minutes later a machine-gun by Nikitsky Gate
opened fire. That’s how the October battle, or as we called it then the
‘October coup’, began in Moscow. It lasted for several days.
   The machine-gun was answered by rifle fire. A bullet flew in through my
window and straight into a portrait of Chekhov on the wall. The bullet hit
Chekhov in the chest and tore a hole in his white piqué waistcoat. I later
found the portrait buried under a heap of plaster. The crossfire crackled like
burning brushwood. Bullets clattered on the metal rooftops. My landlord, an
elderly widowed architect, called out to me to join him in some back rooms
facing the courtyard. Two little girls and their old nanny were sitting on the
floor. The woman had wrapped them up from head to toe in a thick shawl.
   ‘We’re safe here,’ said the landlord. ‘It’s not likely the bullets can pierce
the interior walls.’
   The older of the girls asked from under her shawl: ‘Papa, are the
Germans attacking Moscow?’
   ‘No, that’s no Germans.’
   ‘But then who’s shooting?’
   ‘Be quiet!’ her father snapped.
   I went back to my room. Pressing myself against the wall, I peered out at
an angle through the window. Black clouds had covered up the moon. With
their lights out, the neighbouring buildings were almost invisible in the
darkness. The gunfire raged without stopping, and the bullets sang with
their own individual notes – some whistled lightly, some whined, others
made a strange screeching sound as though they were turning somersaults
in the air. I tried to make out people in the streets but the flashes from the
guns were not bright enough. Judging by the gunfire, the Red Guards had
begun their attack at Strastnaya Square and had now advanced to the
summer restaurant (an ornate wooden pavilion) located about halfway down
the boulevard. The Cadets were holding down their positions in the square
beside Nikitsky Gate.1
   All of a sudden, a tall blue tongue of flame shot up with a quiet roar,
swaying in the wind under my windows. It looked like a torch. In its pale
light I could now make out figures running from tree to tree in the streets
below. Soon a second blue torch flared up on the opposite side of the
boulevard. Bullets had shattered the burners of the street lamps, and the
burning gas was now rushing straight out of the pipes. By its fluttering light
the gunfire immediately increased. I went back to my landlord.
   ‘Well?’ he asked.
   ‘We’ve got to get the children out of here,’ I said.
   ‘But where to? There’s shooting up and down Tverskoy Boulevard.’
   ‘Bolshaya Nikitskaya Street. We can get there through the shops.’
   ‘The Red Guards have set up machine-guns on Malaya Nikitskaya Street
and they’re firing all along Bolshaya Nikitskaya Street. They’re also
directing their guns at the Cadets’ headquarters in the Union Cinema.’
   ‘Then that leaves Leontievsky Lane.’
   ‘Let’s go and have a look.’
   We went down the back stairs into the courtyard. Bullets whistled high
overhead. Here and there bits of cornice exploded and rained down into the
yard. A few people were standing around next to the small porter’s lodge in
a far corner. The shooting in Leontievsky Lane turned out to be even more
intense than on Tverskoy Boulevard. The firewall on the fourth side of our
house loomed over the yard. It didn’t have a single window. The architect
looked at it and cursed.
   ‘It’s a trap,’ he said. ‘We’re blocked in on all sides. There’s no way out.
We’re doomed.’
   It was getting light. The men by the lodge turned out to be employees of
Bartel’s Bakery, located on the building’s ground floor. A bearded baker all
white with flour – a veteran of Port Arthur – suggested moving all the
tenants into the lodge as this was the safest location. The number of people
was small since the entire ground floor was occupied by shops and
stockrooms. And so began the first of many days we spent in the lodge.
   One of the bakers, a young fellow, decided to go over to the Red Guards.
Crouched down low, he ran out of the gate onto the pavement and was
immediately mown down by machine-gun fire from Nikitsky Gate.
   Sitting in the lodge, we talked about what had happened over the past
few days and found ourselves amazed by our own stupidity. The fighting
had taken us all by surprise. Nevertheless, we all knew about the uprising in
Petrograd, the storming of the Winter Palace, the shot fired by the Aurora.
We all knew that martial law had been declared in Moscow, that over on
Khodynka Field well-armed units of Red Guards and soldiers had been
massing, and that the Alexeevskoe and Alexandrovskoe military academies
had been alerted for active duty.
   The Port Arthur veteran took command of our building. A thin trickle of
water still flowed from the tap in the lodge, and so he ordered us to collect
every last jug and pail from every flat and fill them up. The water could be
cut off at any moment. Next we collected all the bread and other remaining
food. It wasn’t very much. We didn’t know what was going on outside, but
were certain fighting was occurring all over Moscow. One thing was clear –
we were in a state of siege. We found ourselves as though in a fortress
ringed by fire. Our fortress, however, wasn’t safe. Already by the end of the
first day, bullets were flying into the courtyard. We sat out on the lodge’s
steps the entire first night, trying to determine by the sound of the gunfire
which side was gaining the upper hand.
   Suddenly, in the middle of the night, the shooting stopped. We all froze.
The silence seemed more threatening than the barrage of gunfire. It didn’t
last long. We heard distant voices in the pitch-darkness calling out:
‘Message for the commander! The Cadets are manning the roofs!’ The
message was repeated, again and again, with growing urgency. As abruptly
as it had stopped, the gunfire resumed, and again lead hail crackled against
the drainpipes and shop signs. Towards evening on the second day the
chemist’s shop caught fire, sending up coloured flames – one minute
yellow, then green, then blue – most likely from the various chemicals.
Muffled explosions boomed in the cellars. Before long the whole building
collapsed. The flames died down, but an acrid, rainbow-coloured cloud of
smoke rose from the ruins for several days. The metal roof on our building
began to buckle and the window frames smoked, but fortunately nothing
caught fire. We choked on the smoke, our eyes burned with tears. The wet
kerchiefs we tied to our faces provided little relief. On the third night there
was another lull in the shooting, and we heard someone shouting on the
boulevard in a strained and uncertain voice: ‘Vikzhel (that was the
abbreviated name at the time for the All-Russian Union of Railway
Workers) calls on all sides to cease fire and send delegates! To negotiate a
truce! Don’t shoot! A representative of Vikzhel shall act as the mediator.
He’ll wait ten minutes. Don’t shoot!’
   An unbelievable silence followed. It was so quiet we could hear the
bullet-ridden shop signs groaning in the wind. I looked at my watch in the
dull glow of the smouldering chemist’s shop. Everyone followed along in
silence as the second hand moved around my watch face, faster, it seemed,
than normal. Five minutes! Seven minutes! Are the Cadets really not going
to surrender? Ten minutes!
   A single shot rang out, followed by another, and then all sides began
firing at once like a swirling tornado. Cannon fire could now be heard
coming from the direction of Arbatskaya Square. Something crashed in the
neighbouring house behind the firewall. A column of fire slowly rose over
the roofline. We later learned the Cadets had shelled the house and set it on
fire to keep it from falling into the hands of the Red Guards. The building,
in military jargon, commanded the whole neighbourhood. This second fire
was more dangerous than the one at the chemist’s. Burning timber and
pieces of red-hot metal from the melting roof came crashing down on us in
the yard. We hurried to put them out with what little water we still had left.
The old baker assured us that we would be safe once the building’s top floor
burned away, assuming, of course, the firewall didn’t collapse. We agreed
with him even though we knew the situation was grim.
   That same night, as if by some miracle, a man climbed through a broken
ground-floor window along Tverskoy Boulevard and made his way into our
yard, now so brightly lit by the fire that every fleck of dirt could be seen on
the stone paving. Wearing a grey jacket and a soldier’s belt, a Mauser on his
side, he had a light brown beard and spectacles and looked a bit like
Dobrolyubov.2
   ‘Quiet!’ he yelled. ‘All the tenants over here! We’ve made a deal with the
Cadets to hold our fire so that we can evacuate all the women and children.
But only the women and children! They won’t let the men leave. I’ll admit,
you’re in an awful bind. The house is going to go up in flames any minute
now, so I’d take my chances and try to run for it, if I were you. But that’s
only after we take the women and children out. Leave by way of Tverskoy
Boulevard and then cross over to Bronnaya Street. Single file, one at a time.
Line up by the gate.’
   The man disappeared as quickly as he had come.
   We all gathered at the gate. The shooting stopped. The first to hurry
across the boulevard were the old nanny and the two little girls. The rest of
the women followed. While they were running the Red Guards and Cadets
began shouting at each other.
   ‘Hey, you snivelling little brats, stop fooling around and drop your
weapons!’ shouted the Red Guards.
   ‘We swore an oath!’ the Cadets yelled back.
   ‘To whom? Kerensky? That son of a bitch has already turned tail and
bolted to the Germans.’
   ‘Not to Kerensky – to Russia!’
   ‘We are Russia!’ the guards shouted. ‘Use your brains!’
   As soon as the women had made it across, the old baker rushed out of the
gate. I was to go next, but just then a burst of machine-gun fire from the
Cadets’ side ripped off a corner of the gate. The baker turned and threw
himself back inside. The crossfire started up again and chunks of broken
brick, glass and wood showered the pavement. We returned to the porter’s
lodge. The baker cursed and then said to me: ‘If only we’d got out. You and
I would have gone over to the Red Guards. You’re just a student, but they’d
have taken you since you’re with me. Look at it any way you like, there’s
just one Russia. And that’s our Russia. Theirs already has one foot in the
grave.’
   I thought of the Red Guards yelling ‘We are Russia!’ and suddenly, with
an incredible rush of clarity, I understood the meaning of the hackneyed
words ‘the mass of the people’. I belonged to that ‘mass of the people’. I
felt at home among those craftsmen, peasants, workers, soldiers, among that
great, enormous world of simple folk which had produced Gleb Uspensky,
Leskov, Nikitin, Gorky and thousands of others like them.3
   ‘Well,’ I said to the baker, ‘there’s no life for me apart from my people.
That I know.’
   ‘Exactly,’ said the baker, grinning. ‘Stick with us, my friend. You don’t
want to get left behind.’

                                        •

The food ran out on the fifth day. Famished, we stuck it out until the
evening. Behind the wall of the lodge the neighbouring house was burning
itself out. There was a small food shop in our building. We had no other
choice than to break in. The back door opened onto the courtyard. The
baker snapped off the lock with an axe, and we took turns that night running
in and grabbing as much sausage, tinned food and cheese as we could carry.
The glow from the fire was so bright we had to hide behind the counters to
stay out of sight of the Cadets at the Union Cinema. We didn’t want to give
them any excuses to shoot.
   The first night went well, but the second night a Red Guard sniper set
himself up in the turret of the corner building on Bronnaya Street. From
there he had a clear view into the courtyard, still lit up by the fire next door,
and so he sat, puffing a cigarette, and taking pot shots at anyone who
ventured out into the yard.
   It was my turn. I managed to dash into the shop – either the sniper didn’t
see me or he didn’t manage to get a shot off. I can still remember the place.
Smoked sausages wrapped in silver paper hung from a stretched wire.
Round, red cheeses on the counter-top were smothered in horseradish from
bullet-ridden jars. Sharp-smelling puddles of vinegar, cognac and various
liqueurs oozed over the floor. Firm, white marinated mushrooms covered
with a reddish film floated in the puddles. The large earthenware jar that
had held the mushrooms lay in shattered pieces.
   I quickly tore off several sausages and stacked them like logs in one arm,
and put a large wheel of Swiss cheese on top, along with a few tins. As I
was running back across the yard something pinged under my arms, but I
didn’t pay any attention. Once inside the lodge, the only woman still with
us, the porter’s wife, pale and sickly, let out a terrible scream. I dropped
everything and saw that both my arms were bleeding. A minute later,
despite our desperate circumstances, everyone was laughing as they helped
to wash the thick tomato purée off me. The sniper had missed me, and
fortunately only the tin of tomatoes, the contents of which I was now
covered in, had been hit.
   The bread was gone, so we ate the sharp cheese together with sausage
and tinned peppers and washed it all down with cold tap water. The
landlord remembered he had a bag of rusks back in his kitchen, and I
offered to go and fetch it. I carefully picked my way up the back stairs,
which were now littered with broken bricks. In the kitchen water poured
from a bullet hole in the pipe, and the floor was deep in sticky, sodden
plaster. I began rummaging around in the cupboard for the bag when I heard
shouts and the pounding of feet coming from the boulevard. I went back to
my room to see what was happening. Red Guards with their rifles at the
ready were running in pairs along the street. The Cadets were retreating
without firing a shot. I had never seen fighting at such close quarters before,
right under my windows. I was struck by the men’s faces – green and
hollow-eyed. Deafened by their own shouting, the men seemed to be in the
grips of a blind rage. I heard the pounding of boots running up the main
stairs and pulled myself away from the window. The door from the stair
landing flew open and smashed against the wall. Bits of plaster fell from the
ceiling. An excited voice yelled out from the landing: ‘Mityukha, bring the
machine-gun!’
   I turned. An old man in a fur hat with ear flaps and a bandolier across his
shoulder stood in the doorway. He was holding a rifle. He stared at me for
an instant with wild eyes and then pointed his gun at me and shouted:
‘Don’t move! Hands up!’
   I raised my hands.
   ‘What’ve you got there, Grandpa?’ came a young voice from the hallway.
   ‘I’ve got one of ’em,’ the old man said. ‘He was shooting. From the
window up here, shooting us in the back, the bastard!’
   Only now did I realise that I was wearing my shabby student uniform.
Just then it hit me that, according to the baker, a student militia on the side
of the Provisional Government had been fighting at Nikitsky Gate. A young
worker walked into the room. He had on a cap pulled down tightly over his
ears. He strode over to me, casually took hold of my right hand, and
examined my palm. ‘Look here, Grandpa, he wasn’t shooting,’ he said. ‘No
marks on his hand from the bolt. It’s perfectly clean.’
   ‘You damned fool!’ yelled the old man in the hat. ‘What if he’d been
shooting with a pistol and not a rifle? There wouldn’t be any marks. He
could’ve tossed the pistol somewhere. Take him to the yard!’
   ‘Anything’s possible,’ the young worker replied and slapped me on the
shoulder. ‘All right, let’s go, and don’t try anything stupid.’
   I don’t know why, but I didn’t say a word the entire time. Maybe because
the situation seemed so hopeless there was no point in trying to explain. I
had been caught standing next to a broken window on the first floor in a
house just captured by the Red Guards. I was wearing a student uniform
smeared with plaster and covered with dark stains that looked more like
blood than tomato purée. No matter what I might have said, no one would
have believed me. And so, I said nothing, recognising, of course, that my
silence was one more damning piece of evidence against me.
   ‘Crazy devil!’ said the old man. ‘It’s obvious he’s a real fanatic.’
   The young Red Guardsman marched me out into the yard. I felt the hard
barrel of his rifle in my back as I walked. The yard was now full of Red
Guards. They were pulling crates out of a demolished warehouse and using
them to build a barricade across Tverskoy Boulevard.
   ‘What’s going on? Who’s this?’ they asked, gathering around me.
   The old man in the hat said I had been shooting at them from a window.
   ‘Off with him, straight to the Good Lord’s general staff !’ a youth with
drunken eyes said merrily.
   ‘Fetch the commander?’
   ‘He’s not here.’
   ‘Where is he?’
   ‘We had an order not to harm any prisoners!’
   ‘Sure, prisoners, but he was shooting us in the back.’
   ‘Then there’s only one thing to do – shoot him right here on the spot.’
   ‘Comrades, we can’t do anything without the commander.’
   ‘What, some sort of lawyer, are you? Up against the wall with him!’
   They dragged me over to the wall. The porter’s wife came rushing out
and threw herself at the Red Guards, grasping at their arms. ‘My sons,
comrades,’ she pleaded, ‘he lives here with us. He didn’t shoot at you. I’m a
sick woman, better to kill me and let him be.’
   ‘Now, now, Mother, don’t go feeling sorry for people without knowing
all the facts,’ said the old man in the hat. ‘We’re not a gang of murderers.
Go on now, leave us alone.’
   I still don’t understand why, as I stood against the wall and heard the
click of the rifle bolts, I didn’t feel a thing. Maybe I went numb inside or
even lost consciousness for a moment. I don’t know. I just stood there
staring at the corner of the gatepost, damaged by a burst of machine-gun
fire, thinking about nothing at all. Yet for some reason I remember the
tiniest details about that post. I remember there were seven deep pits where
it had been grazed by bullets. The pits were white (the upper layer of
plaster) on top and red farther down (exposed brick). I remember the
broken, white-painted bracket of the porter’s bell, a piece of electrical
wiring dangling from the bracket, and a drawing in charcoal on the wall of a
face with an enormous nose and a few straggly hairs. ‘We sure made a fool
out of him!’ was scrawled beneath it. It seemed as though time had stopped,
and I was trapped in some universal silence. In fact, only a few seconds
must have passed before I heard a man shout: ‘What the hell are you doing?
Have you forgotten your orders? Put down those rifles!’
   The man’s voice was at once unfamiliar and yet quite familiar. With
difficulty I looked up from the gatepost – my neck hurt terribly – and saw
the man with the Mauser who had reminded me of Dobrolyubov, the very
man who had come the other night to evacuate the women and children. He
was pale now and didn’t look at me.
   ‘Stop it!’ he said sharply. ‘I know this man. He’s not part of the student
militia. The Cadets are attacking, and you’re fooling around with this
nonsense.’
   The old man in the hat grabbed me by the collar and started shaking me.
‘God damn you!’ he snarled. ‘I nearly had you on my conscience, you fool.
Why didn’t you say anything? And you a student!’
   The young worker rapped me playfully on the shoulder and winked.
‘Beat it, and good luck!’
   A Cadet hand-grenade exploded in the street. The Red Guards ran out
from behind the barricade and into the boulevard. The house emptied. Once
again, the machine-guns rattled with terrifying intensity. I never did learn
the name of the young commander with the Mauser who had saved the
women and children and me as well. I never saw him again, although I
know I could have picked him out of a crowd.
   On the fifth night of the ‘Nikitsky siege’, all of us – unshaven, our voices
hoarse from the cold – sat out on the porter’s steps as we did every night,
trying to guess when the fighting would finally stop. It didn’t seem to be in
any hurry. The fighting had yet to acquire the intense bitterness that would
come later during the civil war. The Red Guards were fighting a ‘war of
attrition’, confident of victory, knowing that the Cadets would soon lose
their nerve and give up. The new Soviet government had seized power in
Petrograd. Bit by bit the country was abandoning the Provisional
Government. The Cadets in Moscow knew this. Their cause was lost. The
bullets whistling through the air around the house at Nikitsky Gate were
their last.
   We sat talking about the fate of the Cadets and the Provisional
Government. The late-night air smelled of smoke from the burning houses.
Only in the direction of Kievsky station was the sky still a dull crimson.
From Khodynka to the north came the whining sound of an artillery shell. It
flew over Moscow and exploded somewhere near the Kremlin. Just then, as
if on command, the shooting stopped. Apparently, the Red Guards and
Cadets were listening and waiting for the second explosion to learn the
artillery’s target. And finally it came – a second whining noise flew through
the air followed by the flash of an explosion by the Kremlin.
   ‘Are they really firing on the Kremlin?’ whispered the old baker.
   The architect sat up. ‘I don’t believe it!’ he shouted. ‘That’s impossible!
No one would ever dare raise their hand against the Kremlin.’
   ‘You’re right, no one would dare,’ the baker agreed quietly. ‘It must just
be a warning. Let’s listen.’
   We sat, frozen in place, waiting for more shots. An hour passed. Nothing.
Then two hours. All was quiet. A thin light began to seep along the eastern
edge of the sky, the chilly light of dawn. It was unusually quiet in Moscow,
so quiet we could hear the burning hiss of the gas torches along the
boulevard.
   ‘Seems like it’s all over,’ said the baker. ‘We should go and have a look.’
   We carefully stepped out onto Tverskoy Boulevard. Lime trees, their
branches broken, loomed in the grey hoar-frost and smoke. Along the
boulevard all the way to the Pushkin Monument, the broken street lamps
blazed like funeral torches. Torn cables covered the ground. They buzzed
angrily, twisting this way and that and catching against the cobbles. A dead
horse, its yellow teeth bared, lay across the tramlines. A long trickle of
frozen blood stretched over the paving stones by our gate. Riddled with
bullet holes from the machine-gun fire, the houses kept dropping sharp
splinters of glass that fell all around us.
   Filling the boulevard from one side to the other, columns of exhausted,
silent Red Guards were walking towards Nikitsky Gate. Their red armbands
had been twisted into string. Almost every one of them was smoking, and
the light at the ends of their cigarettes flashed, creating the effect of a silent
gun battle. A white flag had been hung from a lamp-post in front of the
Union Cinema. Nearby against one of the façades stood a row of Cadets in
crumpled forage caps and greatcoats smeared with bits of grey plaster.
Many of them were half asleep, leaning on their rifles.
   An unarmed man in a leather jacket went up to the Cadets. Several Red
Guards stood waiting behind him. The man in the leather jacket raised an
arm and said something to the Cadets in a low voice. A tall officer stepped
forward. He removed his sword and his revolver, threw them down at the
feet of the man in the leather jacket, saluted, turned and then walked away
slowly on unsteady feet in the direction of Arbatskaya Square.
   Next, all the Cadets, one by one, approached the man in the leather jacket
and laid down their rifles and ammunition. And then, with the same slow,
tired footsteps as their officer, they walked off down Nikitsky Boulevard
towards the Arbat. As they walked some of the Cadets tore off their
epaulettes. The Red Guards watched the Cadets go. Their faces were
creased with tension, their eyes were stern, but no one said a word. It was
all over. From the direction of Tverskaya Street, through the chilly
darkness, came the crash of cymbals, the blare of brass horns and the sound
of voices singing:

        Our deliverance we’ll receive from no one –
        Not God, Tsar, or Hero of another land.
        We alone shall win our freedom,
        By ourselves and with our own hand.
1In November, a few hundred cadets (also known as Iunkers) from local
military academies took to the streets to resist the Bolshevik seizure of
power in Moscow.
2 Nikolai Dobrolyubov (1836–61), poet, literary critic and fierce opponent
of tsarist autocracy.
3Gleb Uspensky (1843–1902), writer who explored themes of the peasantry
and working class; Nikolai Leskov (1831–95), highly esteemed writer of
many works including Lady Macbeth of Mtsensk; Ivan Nikitin (1824–61),
poet, largely of the Russian landscape and peasant life.

                            OceanofPDF.com
72
The Journalists’ Café



The year 1918 began with a thaw, dirty snow and a sky so over-cast and
heavy that upon making contact with the impenetrable clouds the smoke
from the factory chimneys spread out in thick coils. The Moscow streets
still smelled of printers’ ink, and tattered scraps of old newspapers and
posters clung to the walls. The decrees of the Soviet government had been
pasted over them, but they showed through this layer of dull, cheap paper.
Day by day, with an inexorable logic, these harsh, pitiless decrees
demolished the foundations of the old world, hurled them aside and
proclaimed the principles of a new life. It was difficult to imagine what this
life would be like. The change to our basic understanding of things had
happened so unexpectedly that at times everyday life lost its sense of reality
and became as fluid as quicksand. A chill gripped one’s heart. The weak in
spirit reeled like drunkards.
   My room by Nikitsky Gate had been destroyed by the shelling. So I
moved into a dreary brick wing of a house on Granatny Lane, next door to
the house where I had been born twenty-five years before. The landlady
was a morose widow who let rooms to students. My neighbour was a
freckled student named Lipochka. She was the daughter of a village teacher,
and her relatives and friends often came to visit from the country near
Ryazan. They brought with them the aroma of apples, homespun and frost.
For some reason I found the apples’ strong smell and the homespun’s
suggestion of warmth and durability comforting.
   I asked them about life in the country. They sighed, hesitated and then
whispered that no one really knew what was happening. It was as though a
large wave had washed through the village, but what would come next was
anyone’s guess. Maybe the wave had brought a thick new layer of topsoil,
or maybe it had washed away all the seed. That’s how things were in the
village – a mix of terror and joy. The main thing was that the peasants had
finally taken the land for themselves, and no one would ever take it back.

                                      •

Since my return from Kopan in September I had been working as a reporter
for the newspaper the People’s Power. It was one of those newspapers with
a short life. A great many of them had sprung up in those days. Before long
they were all quickly liquidated.
   The paper was published by the Popular Socialist Party, the so-called NS.
Some of its contributors lacked a clear understanding of the party’s rather
vague programme. All we knew for certain was that the paper was run by
quite cultured and educated people, imbued with liberal impulses which
they would not be able to follow through on. At the top was an attractive
and imposing older ‘NSer’ by the name of Yekaterina Kuskova. She spoke
in a deep Gypsy voice and looked down condescendingly on us reporters,
especially after someone wrote some unkind words in indelible pencil on
her office door:

       Cuckoo! Cuckoo! Little cuckoo bird,
       You’ve been cuckooing far too long.
       O Madame Kuskova, you must’ve heard
       That the past’s both dead and gone.

   The newspaper’s editors did not demand any tendentiousness from us
reporters – that was provided by the head writers and better-known
journalists. I was utterly consumed by my sleepless life as a newspaper
reporter, crowded with events – large and small, with scandals, arguments,
mass demonstrations, marches and gun battles. The sharp air of that
revolutionary winter went to our heads. Our hearts glowed with a woolly
romanticism. I could not resist it, nor did I want to. Our faith in universal
happiness shone like an undying light over the chaos of our lives. That
happiness was sure to come. We naïvely believed that our wish to be its
creators and witnesses was enough to guarantee its arrival.
   We searched for universal truths in everything we read. We sought in the
events taking place around us echoes of past eras. The French Revolution,
the Decembrist uprising, the Paris Commune, the revolution of 1905 – all
cast their shadow on contemporary reality, making it still more vivid and
exciting. Whatever its internal contradictions, even the poetry of Verhaeren
(which I was in love with at the time) burned with an old revolutionary
flame:

       To the square with the guillotine’s blade,
       To the streets ringing with the tocsin’s savage cry,
       Our mad dreams fly!

   All the confusion and fever of the day was justified given our youth and
hunger to hurry the arrival of the new order. Everything that I had learned
as a result of my restless youth, particularly from my experiences in the
war, I forgot. The recent events had somehow transported me back ten years
to a time when I was still in thrall to my unripe and childish notions. It
seemed to me as though I had grown stupid. I could feel no ground under
my feet. I was embarrassed and at times angry at my inability to find a
consistent attitude to what was happening around me. At times it struck me
as wonderful and praiseworthy and then as wrong, one minute great and
mighty, the next a parody of greatness to justify unnecessary cruelty, one
moment radiant with promise, the next as dark and terrible as a stormy sky.
   Only one thing was clear – life had settled its accounts with the past and
was racing towards a new shore, one which had to secure, of course,
freedom and justice and to lift up the people to undreamed-of heights and
provide the means to develop all their talents. For me the ultimate point of
the revolution was that it would gather together the finest things life and
culture had to offer in order to raise the human spirit. I was told that this
was not the goal of the revolution but its result. But I believed that the result
must be the goal and that this truth could not be denied.

                                        •

Of all the NSers who worked in the newspaper’s editorial office, Mikhail
Osorgin was the only one we young reporters made friends with. He had
returned from abroad and was completely overwhelmed by the situation in
Russia, which left him all at sea. It even showed in the expression of his
bright, anxious eyes. He was kind and ingratiating with everyone, and he
believed everything everyone told him. Despite Osorgin’s best efforts to
hide it, his appearance and even his weary voice betrayed a deep sadness.
He longed for Italy, where he had spent many years. Back in Russia, he
always seemed to be only half awake. We sometimes tried to convince him
to return to Italy, telling him there was nothing for him to do here and that
there he could at least write his unpretentious stories. He would say in a
guilty voice: ‘You’ve got to understand, I’m a Russian and I love Russia so
much that it breaks my heart. But I don’t recognise her anymore.
Sometimes I think: this can’t be possible, is this really Russia I see here
before me? Even the intonation in people’s voices has changed. It doesn’t
sound like Russian anymore. Clearly, there’s no hope for me.’
   Osorgin was especially at a loss whenever old Gilyarovsky, the
ubiquitous ‘king of reporters’, burst into the office, drowning out everything
and everyone with his hoarse, thundering voice and his smoker’s hack.
   ‘Novices!’ he roared at us young reporters. ‘NSers! Rotten liberals! You
don’t know a thing more about the Russian people than that fool Madame
Kuskova with her ‘Je ne vais pas’ and her ‘Je ne sais pas’! A newspaper
has to breathe fire. It has to be too hot to hold in your hands. It has to make
the reader gasp for breath. And what does your rag do? It mumbles. You
ought to be writing novellas about anaemic young women. I know the
Russian people. Just you wait – they’re gonna give you hell!’
   Osorgin smiled guiltily, and an angry Kuskova slammed her office door.
Gilyarovsky nodded at her office and said in a carefully articulated whisper:
‘Of course, it’s possible for a lady to play politics on her little spider’s legs
from inside her office. And, yes, she can even shed tears over the articles
she writes about the hardy Russian peasant. But just one true word from a
real peasant and you’d all have fits. The same thing goes for the populists!
Farewell! We’ll talk more another time, but I can’t say I care to sit around
here any longer gabbing with the likes of you.’ He left, but a tense silence
hung in the air for some time, for fear the old man might return.
   We young reporters loved Gilyarovsky for his showy gifts, his
inexhaustible imagination and his old man’s despair, and he loved us, in his
own mocking way. From the People’s Power he usually wandered off to
another nearby editorial office, where, depending on the circumstances, he
would launch into another round of attacks, or collect the latest news, or
regale his audience with stories about Chekhov, Kuprin, Chaliapin or
General Skobelev.
   Whenever we ran into each other, he fixed me with his indignant round
eyes and said: ‘It’s time you changed your type, young man, from Brevier
to Bourgeois, and then to bold. Eight-point Brevier is for newspapers, nine-
point Bourgeois for poetry, and bold, that’s for prose. So, strap yourself to
that chair of yours and get to work.’
   The grey-moustachioed old man in his Cossack jacket and astrakhan hat
was Russian expansiveness, wit, cunning and goodness personified.
Journalist, poet and writer, he was also an art lover and a famously generous
Moscow host. He overflowed with jokes, stories, gags and improvisations,
and without all his fooling around he would have withered away. This
stentorian old man was at bottom a child. He loved, for example, to post
letters to non-existent addresses in various exotic-sounding countries –
Australia or the Republic of Costa Rica. These letters always came back to
Moscow marked ‘undeliverable’ in some foreign language and covered
with bright stamps and seals. He examined each one carefully. He even
sniffed the envelopes, thinking he might pick up the sweet scent of tropical
fruit, but they only smelled of leather and sealing wax. Who knows, perhaps
these letters were a pitiful substitute for his dreams of travelling the world –
having a good laugh with the coachmen of Paris and African kings along
the banks of the Zambezi, treating them all to a pinch of his snuff – and
then returning home with such remarkable tales that everyone in old
Moscow would sit up and listen.
   Gilyarovsky greeted the revolution as the most tremendous of news
stories and an expression of the Russian spirit of revolt. He sought its
origins in Stenka Razin and Pugachëv, in peasant uprisings, in ‘red cocks’
and other examples of rebelliousness.1 He knew the life of Moscow like no
one else, especially its hidden side that kept out of sight of the Soviet
authorities: the Gypsy nightclubs at Pokrovskoe-Streshnevo, the sectarian
chapels around Rogozhskaya Zastava, the gambling dens on Brestskaya
Street and the howling mobs of aesthetes who met at the home of Pertsov
near the Cathedral of Christ the Saviour. The leader here was a certain poet
with a lisp and the long, soft hair of a child. He wore a smoking jacket and a
monocle and was so frail you didn’t dare shake his hand for fear that his
pale, transparent fingers might be left in yours as a relic.
   The times were still quite unsettled. They threw together a great many
unlikely and incompatible people, most of whom one had never noticed
before. The revolution had flushed them out of their corners, as though it
had shaken a large barrel of stagnant water and suddenly all sorts of sand,
leaves, twigs, beetles and grubs rose from the depths and up to the surface,
where they swirled round and round on the eddy, bumping and colliding,
finally sinking once again and settling on the bottom.

                                       •

In those early days of the revolution a lot of interesting people gathered in
what was known as the Journalists’ Café on Stoleshnikov Lane. A group of
journalists had pooled their resources and rented an empty second-floor flat,
which they filled with little tables and chairs in the style of a café. Here, we
passed many cheerful long nights in its smoke-filled rooms. Here you could
meet Andrei Bely, the Menshevik Martov, Bryusov and Balmont, the blind
leader of the Moscow anarchists Chërny, the writer Shmelëv, the actress
Roxanova – Chekhov’s first ‘Seagull’,2 Maximilian Voloshin, Potapenko,
and journalists and writers of all ages, views and characters. The kind-
hearted poet Agnivtsev3 would always be there singing his simple little
songs and sporting his usual enormous yellow tie wrapped around his long
neck like a bandage and his baggy checked trousers covered with cigarette
burns.
    Coffee steamed in enamel mugs. It was as bitter as quinine; no amount of
saccharine could sweeten it. Furious arguments broke out here and there,
occasionally interrupted by the piercing crack of a slap in the face. Most
often the face being slapped belonged to a handsome journalist with a dyed
beard and a poisonous tongue. He hissed like a snake and poured his lethal
venom over everything and everyone without exception. These slaps
presented a fire hazard because the man with the dyed beard always had a
lit pipe in his mouth. With every whack to the cheek, this pipe flew out of
his mouth and spiralled over our heads like a firework, raining burning
tobacco hither and thither. Immediately the stench of scorched wool filled
the air. Everyone hurried to douse their smouldering jackets, trousers and
tablecloths. The journalist with the dyed beard nonchalantly picked up his
pipe from the floor, refilled and relit it, and walked out, being sure to
announce to everyone present that he intended to report this outrage to a
comrades’ court.
    ‘Go to hell!’ the others shouted. ‘Report it to the Revolutionary Tribunal
if you want! Just get lost. We’re sick and tired of you! Damn provocateur!’

                                       •
One day Maximilian Voloshin, the red-bearded, solidly built and short-
sighted poet, came by and invited all of us to his lecture on poetry in the
Hermitage Garden Theatre. Only a few people went. The others, bent over
the café’s rickety tables, couldn’t tear themselves away from their heated
political arguments.
   I decided to go to the Hermitage. It was the end of March. The garden
was dark and quiet. Melting snow slid from the trees. I caught the smell of
rotting leaves, like the faint bouquet of wine, of bitter vegetable matter and
last year’s thawed-out flowers, which seemed to be seeping out from deep
down inside the damp, shelterless and long-untended soil. Nature had been
forgotten in those days. We were busy with other things. Words rang out
over the country – rejoicing, denouncing and exposing. Words called people
to arms, words threatened one’s enemies. These words, as if some magnetic
field, attracted millions of people. They summoned them both to destroy
and to construct.
   It was a time of sudden decisions and turbulence, not one for nature.
Nevertheless, the wind still rustled as before in the deserted woods, and the
frozen rivers turned from white to blue, filling with water. The same spiky
hoar-frost covered the lime trees along the boulevards on those gloomy
Moscow mornings. The sun set dutifully as always, and at night the stars
shone timidly as though they understood that no one, not even astronomers
and poets, gave them any thought. Everyone was besieged by their own
mental storm. No one gave the natural world a second look, and if they did
then with preoccupied, unseeing eyes.
   People had been seized by different joys and passions. Even love, simple
and unconditional as sunlight and air, gave way now and then before the
torrent of events and was experienced as an attack of sentimentality
requiring a cure. Loyalty to one’s duty required the rejection of all
misplaced, or possibly even dangerous, movements of the heart. There
would be time again for such matters, but only in some distant future. The
ongoing gigantic upheaval claimed all our strength. Not an ounce of it could
be wasted. Wasted? To sacrifice love was, of course, heroic, but also
unreasonable, especially if the ones doing it knew what they were giving
up.
   Whatever I stopped to think about in those days – be it love, poetry or the
meaning of the events happening around me – I found that I was unable to
form any proper judgement. I longed for some clear sense of values, for
without it, I found it hard to go on. Before long, however, I realised that it
was too soon for this. My time would come, but later. For now, life was too
chaotic, and I had no choice but to wait for the outlines of the new order to
emerge from the chaos.
   Voloshin’s lecture only added to the confusion. The theatre was
practically empty. It was so cold inside my hands nearly froze. A few dusty
electric lightbulbs hanging from the ceiling flickered off and on. A brown
fog hung in the air. Voloshin seemed to be talking to himself, as though he
had forgotten about the audience. He spoke of the war, of the iron age that
had taken over our world, and asked, in a tragic monotone as he peered out
into the depths of the empty hall, what use were poets and artists to such
pitiless times. In England they had hanged the best Irish poets. In France
three hundred poets had died in the first days of the war. One French
general, who considered himself a lover and connoisseur of poetry, had
said: ‘Let these rapturous young men lead the attack. Let them light a flame
in the men who’ll follow.’
   Verhaeren had to deny the whole meaning of his life and was forced to
learn to hate. Jules Lemaître,4 shocked by the absurdities of war, fell ill and
forgot how to read. He could no longer comprehend what the letters meant
and had to be taught all over again from the beginning like a child. The
frightful list of the war’s crimes against art mounted. Voloshin’s voice grew
flatter as he spoke. What he said was right, but what was the solution?
About this he was silent.

                                       •

There were many remarkable people among the café’s regular patrons. They
were all individuals, different in their own way, but together they made for
a jeering and even ruthless tribe of journalists.
   Only one of the patrons, Alexander Yakovlev, a young writer from the
Volga town of Volsk, kept to himself. Yakovlev was an expert on peasant
life, about which he wrote some magnificent articles. Everyone treated this
shy and reserved man with respect, which he earned not only from his
excellent writing, but also from his rare talent for travelling to the remotest
regions of Russia and always managing to return unharmed despite the total
collapse of the country’s railways. These journeys were feats of daring and
endurance. He risked his life nearly every time.
   The demobilised army poured along the railways, leaving ruin and
destruction in its wake. Everything in the carriages that could be broken,
stripped and stolen had been broken, stripped and stolen. Even the rusty
sheet-iron had been wrenched off the roofs. At the Sukharevka Market there
was a lively trade in stolen wash-basins, mirrors and strips of bald red plush
upholstery cut from the carriages’ benches. Bandits and thieves, dressed up
as soldiers, egged on the demobilised men to acts of excess. At the stations
they broke all the windows and tore apart fences and sometimes even entire
railway workers’ huts for wood to stoke the engines. Even cemeteries were
looted – first they stripped the wooden crosses from the graves to feed the
boilers and then the soldiers ripped off the rusty tin wreaths of lilies and
roses and hung them on the trains as decoration. The wind rushing over
these graveyard flowers made a mournful whistle.
   The station officials scattered and hid long before a train full of
demobilised soldiers shook the rails and burst into the station to the noise of
bandit whoops and accordions and the clatter of machine-gun fire. The
slightest delay of the train ended in savage retribution to any on-duty
officials who had failed to run away. At the sound of the mob’s cry of ‘Get
’er movin’, Gavrila!’ the engine drivers quaked and the blood drained from
their faces. Any plain civilian or government official who by some miracle
had managed to board would usually be grabbed by the soldiers and thrown
from the moving train.
   Yakovlev had been thrown off three times but was somehow still alive.
The most amazing thing was that Yakovlev returned from these life-
threatening journeys refreshed, excited, full of the fascinating things he had
seen and heard, and always insisting that no price was too high to pay for
the material he had gathered. He made his way to the most moth-eaten,
isolated little towns – Khvalynsk, Sarapul, Serdobsk – places so remote
from Moscow that they had become almost mythical. It was difficult to
believe they even existed.
   It seemed as though Russia had gone back in time to the appanage period
of small independent principalities, cut off by the lack of roads and the
breakdown of the post and telegraph, by dense forests, marshes and
demolished bridges, and by distances that had grown immeasurably longer
overnight. In these forgotten corners of the country, home-grown republics
were proclaimed, each with its own crudely printed currency (although
typically postage stamps, not banknotes, were traded as money). All this
was jumbled together with remnants of the past – balsam in the window
boxes, the ringing of church bells, prayer services, wedding feasts
celebrated to the accompaniment of drunken salvoes from sawn-off
shotguns, fields heavy with grain or bitter yellow winter cress, and talk
about the end of the world when nothing of Russia would be left but ‘the
black of night and three pillars of smoke’. Yakovlev described all this in a
leisurely manner, with taste, enjoyment and the skill of a saddler stitching a
saddle girth with a coloured length of sturdy waxed thread. Our paths
crossed from time to time over the years, and I was always impressed by his
essential good-naturedness and his love of the simple Russian people.
Characteristically, his dying wish was to be buried not in Moscow, but on
the banks of the Volga in his hometown of Volsk.

                                      •

Every so often a small, nondescript man in a soft hat with a drooping brim
called in at the café. It seems he had worked for a time for a newspaper in
either Tula or Orël. Once he was involved in an amusing, and barely
believable, incident with Mikhail Prishvin that the latter loved to tell.5
   Prishvin was moving from Yelets to Moscow. At that time anti-profiteer
detachments of lawless sailors from the Baltic fleet controlled the railway
junctions. Prishvin had sewn all his things, including his manuscripts and
notebooks, into several sacks and dragged them onto the train with him. At
a junction near Orël, a detachment of sailors took his sacks, despite his
protests and appeals. Prishvin jumped from the train and ran off to find the
commanding officer in the station. This turned out to be a broad-faced
sailor with a Mauser on his belt and a pewter ring in one ear. He was
shovelling salted fish into his mouth with a wooden spoon as though it were
porridge and refused to listen to Prishvin.
   ‘Typical intelligènt!’ he said. ‘One more squawk out of you and I’ll arrest
you for sabotage. I’m sure a revolutionary tribunal could dig up something
on you if asked. So, my friend, get lost while you’re still in one piece.’
   Just then the man in the hat with the drooping brim walked into the
station and, standing by the doors, said in a soft but clear voice: ‘Give the
citizen his things back at once.’
   ‘And just who are you? I don’t take orders from some little mouse in a
hat.’
   ‘I am Magalif,’ the man said in the same soft, clear voice, never once
taking his eyes off the sailor.
   The sailor choked on his fish and stood up. ‘I beg your pardon,’ he said
ingratiatingly. ‘My lads must have slipped up somehow. Got carried away, I
guess. Lobov!’ he yelled. ‘Give this citizen his things back! That’s an order
from an agent of the Magalif administration itself. Understand? Take them
back to his compartment. On the double! Stealing from every last person,
you fools. Use your heads!’
   Out on the platform Prishvin started to thank the man, but he replied only
that Prishvin ought to clearly write the word ‘Ethnology’ on all his sacks in
indelible pencil. ‘A Russian is always impressed by a word he doesn’t
know, especially if it’s foreign. You do that and no one will touch your
things. I swear to it.’
   ‘Please excuse my ignorance,’ Prishvin said, ‘but what is this powerful
organisation you are from, this Magalif, as you called it? Why is the mere
mention of it enough to make the head of this detachment quake with fear?’
   The man smiled guiltily. ‘It’s no organisation. It’s my surname,’ he said.
‘It’s uncommon, and so I find that sometimes it’s enough to do the trick.’
   Prishvin roared with laughter. He followed Magalif’s advice and wrote
the mysterious word ‘Ethnology’ on all his sacks. No one laid a finger on
them after that. This happened about the time when all sorts of ridiculous
abbreviated names and titles began to enter the language. It became a
problem of catastrophic proportions. Within a few years there were so many
of them that they threatened to turn the Russian language into something as
inarticulate and pointless as Volapük.6

                                      •

Every evening the journalist and well-known Muscovite bibliophile
Shchelkunov walked into the café, wiping the condensation off his thick
glasses and blindly stumbling into the tables. He invariably carried with
him heavy batches of books tied together with telephone flex. Shchelkunov
removed his shabby, old-fashioned overcoat with its beaver collar and hung
it carefully on a peg, whereupon the sound of desperate miaowing filled the
café. Shchelkunov had a habit of picking up stray cats as he walked the
streets, stuffing them into the pockets of his coat, and carrying them around
with him all day until returning home late at night and handing them to his
wife to feed.
   He looked like a provincial doctor. His beard always seemed to be wet
and unkempt, and his jacket hung on him like a sack from the weight of all
the books and manuscripts he had stuffed in his pockets. There were still no
fountain pens back then, so Shchelkunov always carried with him a bottle
of Vanka-Vstanka ink and several goose quills. He couldn’t write with a
pencil, and it seems I was the only one who understood this fact about him
and never made fun of his goose quills. I had always found anything written
in pencil to be messy and unfinished. I believed that a clear idea ought to be
clearly written. If it were possible, I would write only with Indian ink on
thick, heavy paper.
   Shchelkunov liked to sit down at a table, carefully sharpen a quill with a
razor blade, and then, breathing heavily, begin to write up his notes in a
hand that befitted a pre-Petrine scribe. He wrote about rare books, the
discovery of famous lost paintings, exhibitions, bibliographic news and
other curiosities. He left home early every morning in the hunt for valuable
books and news, and he would turn up in the most unexpected places
around Moscow. His notebook was full of addresses for pious old widows,
retired buyers for the city’s various bookshops, bookbinders, dealers and
fences. These were his suppliers. Most of them lived on the outskirts of the
city – Izmailovo, Cherkizovo, Kotly and beyond Presnya. He made sure to
visit all these places, by tram whenever possible, but mostly on foot.
   He had a sixth sense for books. He could sniff out a rare edition and track
it down with the patience of a retriever. He was not the only bibliophile in
Moscow, however. Well aware of his uncanny ability to uncover rarities, the
other collectors and dealers watched his every move closely and often tried
to intercept his prey. Thus, he was always having to cover his tracks in the
hope of throwing his rivals off the scent. This cloak-and-dagger business
lent Shchelkunov a certain conspiratorial air. Perhaps this is why he always
spoke in a muffled whisper, his narrow Tatar eyes glinting suspiciously.
   ‘It appears’, he confessed in a voice so low I had to lean far over the table
to hear, ‘that in the next few days I shall uncover the secret location of Ivan
the Terrible’s long-lost library. God forbid Lunacharsky gets wind of this.7
Don’t breathe a word!’
   If anyone brought Shchelkunov a rare book for his opinion, he leafed
through it, appeared to give it a sniff, twisted up his mouth and said: ‘It’s a
well-known edition. You can pick one of these up any day of the week at
the stalls by the Kitaigorod Wall. You’ve been had. I’m sorry. But if you
like, I’d be happy to swap it with you for a first-edition copy of Chekhov’s
Motley Stories? What do you mean, no?! A year from now you’ll be sorry.
All right, then, fine! I’ll make it an Italian edition of Marco Polo. You’ll
have it tomorrow.’
   Without waiting for the unguarded owner’s consent, Shchelkunov tucked
the rare edition into his fat briefcase, snapped the lock and, glancing
around, waited for the perfect opportunity to slip out. As best I can
remember, none of these simpletons ever managed to get their books back
once they had been engulfed by Shchelkunov’s briefcase. It was useless to
make a scene. At the first sign, Shchelkunov silently threw on his coat,
lowered his head and charged out of the café like a bull. Nothing and no one
was strong enough to stop him. Breathing heavily through his nose, he was
obstinately silent and deaf to even the most terrible insults.
   Once Shchelkunov invited me to come along with him to a doss house
near Vindavsky station. He had learned that a self-taught poet from Tula
was living there. The man was broke but still owned some valuable books
and manuscripts that Shchelkunov hoped to wheedle out of him. We took
the tram to the station but got off one stop early to be cautious. For some
reason Shchelkunov was convinced that his eternal bibliographical enemies
were onto him that day and were watching his every step in the hope of
beating him to the poet from Tula. All of a sudden, he grabbed me by the
arm and pulled me behind a hoarding. We hid there for a moment, and
Shchelkunov, struggling to catch his breath, said: ‘Right there! It’s a broker.
Look, just there on the pavement opposite the doss house. The old man in
the tattered panama hat and the billy-goat beard. This is why I brought you
along. I need your help.’
   ‘How can I help?’
   ‘I’ll duck into that chemist’s shop, which will give me a good view of the
house from the front window. I’ll wait there. You’ve got to get rid of him. If
he sees me go into the house, I’m done for. I’ve been searching for this
damned poet for over two months.’
   ‘How am I supposed to get rid of him?’
   ‘Pretend you’re a detective. That’ll scare him off. He’s got dirty hands.
He once sold me books stolen from the Museum of History.’
   Shchelkunov didn’t give me a moment to think before slipping away to
hide in the chemist’s. There was nothing left for me to do but play my part.
But how? I pulled my cap down over my eyes, thrust my hands into my
pockets and sauntered over to the doss house. A few steps short of the old
man in the panama, I stopped, leaned back against a fence and began to
examine the house with exaggerated attention. It was an old, four-storey
building with a crack in its façade that ran all the way from the roof to the
cellar. A notice written in alternating blue and red pencil had been stuck to
the outer door: ‘All Callers Are Hereby Forewarned: Silence on all floors!’
   The old man in the panama shot me a glance. I stood there, my
expression impassive and perhaps, so I thought, even a bit insolent, and
then looked down into my cupped hand and stared closely, as though
surreptitiously comparing the man’s face with a photograph. He turned
abruptly and began to hurry away. But then he made a mistake: he pulled
out his cigarette case and lit up. I followed, keeping a close eye on him. The
obvious tension in his frightened, spindly back told me he was doing
everything in his power not to break into a run. I caught up with him and
asked in a polite tone: ‘Could I have a light, citizen?’
   With that, the old man let out a wild scream, jumped straight up in the air,
and then, knees bent, scuttled away like a crab, ducking through a nearby
gate and vanishing from sight. The whole scene was bizarre and mildly
terrifying.
   Meanwhile, a satisfied Shchelkunov was rubbing his pudgy hands. He
had beaten the dealers and managed to buy a letter of Leo Tolstoy from the
Tula poet. As for me, I was angry with Shchelkunov and after this stupid
business decided not to have anything more to do with him. I thought that,
like most book collectors, Shchelkunov never read any books and just
wanted to collect them, regardless of what they were about. I was soon
proved wrong, however.
   One day at the Journalists’ Café Shchelkunov gave a lecture on the
history of books. It was less of a lecture, however, and more of a poem or
even a rapturous encomium to books. Books, he said, are the sole repository
of human thought and its only mode of transmission from century to
century, from generation to generation. They preserve it through all time in
its primordial freshness and its variations of tone and meaning, as though it
were newly born. Although made by human hands, books have become part
of the eternal, like space and time. Mortals have created something of
immortal value. But in the commotion of our daily lives, we continually
forget this.
   We try to grasp the cadence of Homer’s measured verses and a miracle
happens right before our eyes – Homer’s petrified, thousand-year-old
shepherd’s staff blossoms with the flowers of living poetry. Our first
encounter with an idea, even one that has come down to us over an
unthinkable measure of time, is always fresh and immediate. We, children
of the twentieth century, experience the same shock of novelty that our
distant ancestors once did. The centuries of the past have receded into an
impenetrable fog, but human thought shines brightly through that fog like
the bright blue star Vega, as if it had absorbed every last glimmer of light
from the entire universe. And just as the ‘black coalpits’ of space cannot put
out the light of this purest of stars, so none of history’s epochs of ruin and
destruction or the dark spaces of time have the power to destroy an idea
embodied and preserved in all the hundreds, thousands and millions of
manuscripts and books.
   Shchelkunov was convinced that there were lost manuscripts waiting to
be discovered, particularly in the ancient lands of the Bible. Their discovery
would enrich humanity with lost philosophies and pearls of poetry.
Recently, a city built by the Ptolemies had been discovered in the mountains
of Sinai. It had lain hidden in the hot canyons of the desert. Every structure
of this lost city was an architectural masterpiece. And if whole cities could
be found, then why not scrolls and old books as well?

                                      •

After hearing about the lost cities of Arabia from Shchelkunov, I became
interested in the East and its poets. Shchelkunov gladly gave me books by
Saadi, Omar Khayyam and Hafiz.8 It may seem strange that at a time of
revolution, of the breaking of all familiar concepts and ways of living, some
people, along with just trying to survive such times, would find themselves
drawn to the East, to poetry and to a great many other things. But, in fact,
there was nothing particularly remarkable about this since the human
mind’s thirst for knowledge is stronger than might be expected. The harsh
vigour of the revolution’s first years was so powerful and stimulating that it
touched all our thinking. It seemed obvious to me that the people of our era,
all of us children of the revolution, must possess not only the high moral
qualities that in earlier times had been attributes of no more than a few
outstanding men and women, but also the spiritual riches of the past and of
every country. I sought this enrichment wherever I could find it, including
in Eastern poetry.
   I was encouraged in my infatuation for the East by a journalist named
Rozovsky, a lazy older man with a wavy auburn beard. He went about all
winter in a long and once luxurious but now bedraggled episcopal fur coat,
and, despite his Jewish origin, had the distinct appearance of an Orthodox
priest. He spent all his free time in his room lounging on a battered old
ottoman covered with a Turkoman rug and engrossed in books about the
East. He was an expert in Islam, particularly the various Muslim sects. He
was convinced that of all the sects, only the Persian Bahá’í led by Abdu’l-
Bahá were truly revolutionary.9 He believed that this sect would bring about
the downfall of Islam and usher in a spiritual renaissance in the lands of the
Middle East.
   Before the revolution Rozovsky had been to Turkey and Persia to study
these lands and their cultures first hand. He was a solitary, independent man
who loved to travel. He lived for almost a year in Asia Minor, mostly in the
ancient Turkish capital of Bursa. He had much to say about Turkey, but he
did it in his own unique way. He never began with the main point of his
story, but with little details, often irrelevant bits of information. But
gradually, bit by bit, the details would build up into a fascinating story, and
he told it in such a precise way that had you written down his words, they
could have been published without changing a thing. But Rozovsky was so
terribly lazy that he wrote little and published even less. As soon as he sat
down at his desk to write, he was overcome by boredom, dropped his pen
and went off to his newspaper or the Journalists’ Café to find someone to
chat with.
   I recall Rozovsky’s stories about the old wooden house where he lived in
Bursa. He never began the story with a description of the house, but with an
elaborate discourse on the distinctive smell of Turkish wooden houses.
According to Rozovsky, they all smelled of the warm dust of rotting wood
and of honey, particularly on hot, still afternoons when if you so much as
touched the verandah railing it would singe your hand. The smell of dust
was always mixed with a faint hint of dry roses. The smell of honey came
from the surrounding olive gardens filled with wild roses. The flowers
attracted swarms of honeybees which built their combs in the attics; the
sweet aroma wafted throughout the house. Rozovsky first encountered the
thick smell of dried roses and honey in Constantinople, when he was shown
the gem-encrusted casket holding the green banner of the Prophet. The
banner was wrapped in layers of rotting silk and sprinkled with dry rose
petals.
   Rozovsky helped me understand the meaning behind much of the
obscure Arabic imagery in Bunin’s poems about the East. Because of
Bunin, Islam appeared to me as a religion of dreams, torpor and patience,
like the mood he experienced upon reading the Qur’an:

       In the sultry hour when the unruffled mirage
       Melts the whole world into one great dream,
       My soul is carried away, beyond the edge of this sad world,
       Into the infinite brilliance of the gardens of the Jinns.
       There, beyond the mists, flows the river of rivers,
       There, the azure al-Kauthar streams,
       Promising all the earth, all tribes and nations
       Peace. Be patient, pray – and believe.

   When I mentioned the passivity and torpor of Islam to Rozovsky, he said
that was sheer nonsense. All religions could be militant or fanatical, he said,
and especially Islam. All it took was to declare a holy war and raise the
green banner of the Prophet for Islam to swoop down on the world like a
devastating black simoom blowing out of the desert. I pictured that storm to
myself – a low, whirling darkness, the cries of the mounted warriors and the
flash of their bared swords like lightning over the dry sands.

                                       •

I cannot, of course, describe all the patrons of the Journalists’ Café, even
though they deserve it. Nevertheless, it isn’t possible to avoid mentioning
one particular specimen of old Moscow, namely the chairman of the Society
of Lovers of Canary Singing, the reporter Saveliev. This giggling old man
was the main supplier of political gossip and rumour. He never got into any
trouble over this because he talked through his nose in an unintelligible
patter. Supreme concentration was necessary to even guess at what he was
talking about.
   His pockets were always stuffed with hard, sticky sweets that he passed
out to us smokers. He pushed these sweets on us, insisting we have one,
even though they always came out of his pockets with bits of lint, dirt and
other rubbish stuck to them. As soon as we saw him coming, we rushed to
put out our cigarettes in the hope of avoiding these sweets.
   Saveliev’s nickname was ‘de Mortuis’ because all he did at the
newspaper was write obituaries. These always began in one of two ways,
either ‘Death has torn from our ranks’ or ‘Our society has suffered a
grievous loss’. All of us were so tired of his obituaries that one of the
paper’s editors decided to liven things up – and to have some fun at
Saveliev’s expense – by inserting the words ‘At long last’ before the usual
‘death has torn from our ranks’. A terrible scandal ensued. The editor was
sacked, and everyone felt terrible about the whole episode, even though the
obituary had been for some disagreeable old professor. Saveliev spent the
entire day at his desk, blowing his nose.
   ‘I’ve seen hundreds of people off into the next world,’ he muttered, ‘but I
have never once sinned against their memory. It’s not my place to judge.
And I’ve never agreed to write even a single line about any scoundrels.’
   Still drying his tears, Saveliev went to see the editor-in-chief and told
him, although barely able to speak, that he could no longer work for a
newspaper where such shameful things were possible. The editor’s best
efforts to get him to change his mind failed. Saveliev left the office for
good, and it wasn’t long before everyone at the paper began to miss his
giggling and his silly way of talking and even his sticky sweets covered
with pocket grit and fluff.
   Saveliev died soon after. His obituary was indistinguishable from every
other boring and unfeeling obituary: ‘Death has torn from our ranks a
humble worker in the newspaper field . . .’ Et cetera, et cetera. He had been
a bachelor, and the only living creature left behind in his small stuffy room
was an old parrot. The bird hung upside down from its perch and giggled
like its late owner and, from time to time, screamed wildly: ‘Polly, want a
candy?’ The building’s porter adopted the parrot, and thus were all
Saveliev’s outstanding accounts settled.
   Always the last to burst into the café was the polite but noisy Oleg
Leonidov, also known as the ‘King of Scoops’. He purposely arrived late,
just at the moment when the newspapers, damp with printers’ ink, were
rolling off the presses. By then Leonidov could safely share with the
competing reporters all the scoops he had made that day without fear they
might end up in any of the other papers. They all turned green with envy,
but there was nothing to be done about it.
  It was no use trying to follow him. He was too elusive. No one knew how
or when he managed to worm his way into the innermost recesses of the
new Soviet governmental departments and kindly, gently, with an
ingratiating smile extract from them their most sensational stories. Nor
could he be tricked or fooled. He was a master of those arts himself. Just
once, during the war, did he fall for a fake story fed to him by an incautious
Kievan journalist. Leonidov nearly got sacked, but his revenge was so
complete that after that no one even dared to joke with Leonidov, much less
make a fool of him.
  On the surface, Leonidov’s ploy looked quite simple. He sent the
journalist in Kiev a cryptic telegram: ‘IN DORPAT IN ODESSA
TSARITSYN IN CRIMEA FEED OATS ONLY LAST.’ It was wartime.
The telegram came to the attention of the military censors, who deemed it a
coded message. Espionage was suspected. The journalist was arrested.
  No one knows how long he would have sat behind bars if one of the
investigators hadn’t hit upon the idea of combining the first letter of each
word in the telegram in the hope of cracking the code. They read ‘IDIOTIC
FOOL’. The journalist was eventually freed, although utterly frightened,
while Oleg Leonidov calmly strolled about Moscow, basking in his new
reputation as a dangerous wit.

                                      •

The Journalists’ Café closed down at the end of the summer of 1918 due to
a lack of funds. We were all sad to see it go, and not just us reporters from
the various newspapers, but writers and artists as well, everyone for whom
this flat with its low ceiling and absurd pink wallpaper had been their club,
a comfortable, inviting place where we could speak our minds.
   I was especially fond of the club at twilight. Through the open windows,
beyond the bell tower of the fire station and the pedestal where Skobelev’s
statue had recently stood, the warm glow of the sunset faded in the golden
dusk. The noise of the city, or rather its soft hum (in those days there were
few cars and the trams went by rarely), gradually died away, and nothing
but the popular sounds of the ‘Song of Warsaw’ could be heard in the
distance.
   More and more often at this hour it made my heart ache to recall that out
there, beyond Brestsky station, beyond Khodynka Field, where the sun had
slowly set, the dew was already covering the birch groves and the clear
water was gurgling over the snags in the river outside Moscow. The cool
river smelled of mud and rotting timber piles. The deserted dachas were
dark, and the peonies, planted long ago, blossomed in solitude. Drops of
dew fell from the roofs onto the glass tops of the boarded-up verandahs, and
their rhythmic sound was all that could be heard in the thickening dusk. The
parks and fields and woods, left for a while in peace, stood close to the
agitated city of Moscow, listening drowsily to its excited rumble.


1 Cossack Stenka Razin (1630–71) led a major rebellion against tsarist
Russia; Yemelyan Pugachëv (1742–75), ataman of the Yaik Cossacks,
waged a bloody insurrection in the reign of Catherine the Great; ‘releasing
the red cock’ is a peasant term for arson.
2Andrei Bely (1880–1934), poet and novelist, best known for his Symbolist
novel Petersburg; Lev Chërny (1878–1921), revolutionary and prominent
Russian anarchist; Maria Petrovskaya (stage name Roxanova) (1874–1958),
actress best known for her work with the Moscow Art Theatre.
3 Nikolai Agnivtsev (1888–1932), poet, playwright and prolific children’s
author.
4 François Élie Jules Lemaître (1853–1914), French poet, dramatist and
influential critic.
5 Mikhail Prishvin (1873–1954), nature writer and author of children’s
books.
6 An international language created by a German priest, Johann Martin
Schleyer, in 1880, later supplanted by the rise of Esperanto.
7Anatoly Lunacharsky (1875–1933), writer, critic and Soviet commissar of
enlightenment.
8 Major Persian poets and writers: Abū Muhammad Muslih al-Dīn bin
Abdallāh Shiīrāzī, known as Saadi of Shiraz (1210–91); Omar Khayyam
(1048–1131); Khwāja Shams-ud-Dīn Muḥmmad Ḥāfeẓ-e Shīrāzī, better
known as Hafiz or Hafez (1315–90).
9 ‘Abdu’l-Bahá (1844–1921), born ‘Abbás in Tehran, leader of the Bahá’í
faith 1892–1921.

                           OceanofPDF.com
73
The Hall with a Fountain



The government moved from Petrograd to Moscow. Soon afterwards, my
editor at the People’s Power sent me to the Lefortovo Barracks, where
Lenin was to speak to a group of demobilised soldiers.
   It was a raw evening. The air in the enormous barrack hall was thick with
smoke from harsh makhorka tobacco. An icy rain lashed at the grimy
windows. There was a sour smell of wet greatcoats and carbolic acid. The
soldiers, in dirty puttees and sodden boots, their rifles beside them, sat on
the muddy floor. Most of them were men back from the front, stranded in
Moscow since the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk. Thoroughly disgruntled, they
didn’t believe anyone or anything. They made noisy demands, one day
clamouring to be sent back to their home villages, the next flatly refusing to
leave Moscow amid loud protests that they were being tricked and the trains
were not going to take them home but back to the front. Deserters and
suspicious characters were riling them up. As everyone knows, if you bait
and confuse the simple Russian long enough he will suddenly fly into a rage
and rebel. In the end, the people who suffer the most in these army revolts
are the ordnance men and cooks. A persistent rumour was going around
Moscow then that the soldiers at the Lefortovo Barracks were at the point of
revolt.
   I pushed my way with difficulty into the hall and stood at the back. The
soldiers gave me, a stranger in civilian clothes, a sullen, threatening stare. I
asked them to let me through so I could move closer to the cheap plywood
platform up front, but no one would budge an inch. It would have been
dangerous to insist. Here and there, soldiers clicked their rifle bolts, as if
they were playing around. One of the men yawned loudly. ‘To hell with this
already!’ he said, scratching the back of his head under his sheepskin hat.
‘More of the same mumbo-jumbo. I’m fed up with their excuses and
stalling.’
   ‘What d’you want? We’ve got tobacco and they’re dishing out some
grub. Oughta be enough for us.’
   ‘Moscow’s all right,’ a scrawny, bearded soldier laughed. ‘Take the girls
out, get a dose of clap, and you’ve got yourself a souvenir of the old capital
for life. Better than a St George’s medal!’
   ‘Get a move on!’ soldiers shouted from the back, pounding the floor with
their rifle butts. ‘Let’s hear it! Now you’ve got us all here, stop wastin’ our
time!’
   ‘He’s just about to start.’
   ‘Who?’
   ‘Looks like Lenin.’
   ‘Lenin? Yeah, right. He’s just dying to get a look at your ugly mug.’
   ‘He’s got no one else to talk to but you and your toothless gob.’
   ‘Ah, for Christ’s sake, he . . .’
   ‘We know what he’ll say.’
   ‘More of the same old rubbish.’
   ‘I’ve already had a bellyful of their slogans. Enough!’
   ‘Listen, brothers, we’re not lettin’ anyone send us anywhere!’
   ‘That’s right. We’ll decide who gets sent and where!’
   Suddenly, a noise went through the hall, and the men began to move and
rose to their feet, sending rippling waves through the cloud of tobacco
smoke. Blinded by the smoke and the dim light, I became aware of
someone saying in an unusually calm, high voice: ‘Let me through,
comrades, let me through.’ The man rolled his r’s as he spoke. The men in
the back crowded forward to get a better view. They were met with pointed
rifles. The soldiers began shouting and cursing at each other. It seemed
gunfire might erupt at any moment.
   ‘Comrades!’ said Lenin.
   The noise was cut, as if by a knife. The only sound was the wheezing
breath of the agitated crowd. Lenin began to speak. I had trouble hearing
him. I was being crushed by the throng of soldiers. I could feel a rifle butt
digging into my ribs. Some man behind me had laid a meaty hand on my
shoulder and squeezed it from time to time. His grip was so strong it hurt.
The cigarettes stuck to the soldiers’ lips burned down. The men had
forgotten all about them and had stopped puffing. Blue wisps of smoke
swirled upwards towards the ceiling.
   Through the sound of the rain I began to make out the quiet, simple
words. Lenin wasn’t urging the men on. He was merely giving these
inarticulate and embittered men answers to the questions they were
themselves only dimly aware of, answers that they had heard before, but not
in the right words. He spoke in an unhurried voice about Brest-Litovsk,
about the treachery of the Left SRs,1 about the union of the workers and the
peasants and about bread. He said rowdy meetings and raising hell in
Moscow was not the answer, nor was waiting for someone to solve their
problems. Rather, they should go back home to work the land and trust the
government and the party to do the right thing. I could hear little of what
Lenin was saying, but I had a good idea from the shift in the men’s
breathing, from the way they pushed their hats back on their heads, their
gaping mouths and the sudden, unexpected sighs of agreement.
   The heavy hand on my shoulder had relaxed. Its weight now suggested
the touch of a friend. Once he was back in his village this soldier would pat
the cropped heads of his children with this hand, as he sighed with relief
thinking that the land was at last theirs. He would be telling himself that all
he needed to do now was plough and sow and raise these little rascals to do
the same after him. I wanted to see what he looked like. I turned. He was a
pale, young recruit with a broad, smooth face covered in fair stubble.
   ‘The chairman!’
   ‘What chairman?’ I asked, not understanding.
   ‘It’s him, the chairman of the people’s commissars. Promising us land
and peace. Didn’t you hear?’
   ‘Yes, I did.’
   ‘Well, there you have it! My hands are itching for that land. And I’ve
been gone too long from the family.’
   ‘Pipe down!’ hissed our neighbour, a scrawny little soldier whose forage
cap kept sliding down over his eyes.
   ‘Hold your tongue!’ the recruit growled back and began to hurriedly
unbutton his faded tunic. ‘Wait, hold on, I want to show you . . .’ he
muttered. He fumbled around under his collar for a bit and then pulled out a
sweat-stained canvas bag hanging on a string around his neck. It held a
photograph, folded in half, that he blew the dust off and then handed to me.
The only light was an electric bulb protected by a wire mesh high up on the
ceiling. I couldn’t make out a thing on the photograph. The recruit lit a
match and cupped it in his hands. He held it there until it burned down to
his fingers and went out.
   I looked at the photograph only because I did not want to insult him. I
was certain that it was the typical family photograph that I had seen so
many times before in peasant huts next to the icons. The mother was always
seated in front – a dry, wrinkly old woman with knotty fingers. No matter
what she was like in real life – kind and patient or shrill and bossy – she
was always photographed with the same stony face and tight lips. In that
instant when the camera shutter clicked, she was memorialised as the strict
matriarch of the family, the embodiment of the severe progenitor of the
clan, while gathered around her, some standing, some seated, were her
wooden, bulging-eyed children and grandchildren.
   You had to look hard and long at these photographs until you recognised
in the stiff figures your well-known friends: the matriarch’s quiet,
consumptive son-in-law, a village cobbler; his wife, a big-bosomed,
shrewish woman in a frilly blouse and strap boots that showed her bare
calves; a youth with a forelock and the same terrifying vacant eyes you
encounter in street thugs; and then that other one, grinning and black-
haired, whom you recognised as the finest blacksmith in the county. And
the grandchildren – frightened little creatures who stared out at you like
young martyrs. These were children who had known neither kindness nor
affection. Perhaps their uncle, the cobbler, had secretly shown pity and
given them his old boot lasts as toys. If so, then he had been the only one.
   But the photograph the recruit showed me was nothing like these family
waxworks. It showed an open carriage with a fine black pair. The recruit,
young and handsome in a velvet waistcoat, sat on the box. In his strikingly
long arms he held the heavy reins, while in the carriage, turned to face the
camera, sat a young and incredibly lovely young peasant woman.
   ‘Light another match,’ I said to the recruit.
   He hurriedly struck another one, and I noticed that he was looking at the
photograph with the same attentive surprise as me. The young woman in the
carriage was dressed in a long calico dress with a frilly collar and a white
kerchief pulled down low over her forehead like a nun’s coif. She was
smiling, her lips faintly parted. There was so much tenderness in her smile I
felt my heart skip. She had large, sensitive eyes, which appeared to be grey
in the photograph.
   ‘I worked as a coachman for the landowner Velyaminov for two years,’
he whispered. ‘We had our photograph taken in his coach, in secret. That’s
my bride. Right before our wedding.’
   He fell silent.
   ‘Well, what’s wrong? Aren’t you gonna say something?’ he said all of a
sudden in a rough, challenging voice. ‘Don’t tell me you’ve seen many
beauties like her before.’
   ‘No,’ I replied. ‘Never, not once.’
   ‘My little Ryabina,’ said the soldier, calmer now. ‘She died right before
the war. In childbirth. But we did have a daughter, and she’s just like her
mother. Come and visit, my friend, you’re always welcome. I’m from Orël
province . . .’
   Just then the crowd surged forward, and we were separated. Sheepskin
hats and caps flew into the air. Wild cheering erupted near the platform and
swept back through the hall before echoing out into the street. I caught sight
of Lenin, surrounded by soldiers, walking briskly towards the doors. He
was laughing, one hand pressed over his ear to keep from going deaf, and
saying something to the scrawny soldier whose forage cap kept falling
down over his eyes. I looked around for the young recruit in the milling
crowd, but unable to find him I walked out. Cries of ‘Hurrah!’ still rang out
in the side street. Apparently, the soldiers were cheering Lenin as he was
being driven away.
   I walked home through the long dark streets. The rain had stopped, and a
wet moon shone among the clouds. I thought about Lenin and the huge
mass movement being led by this surprisingly simple man whom I had just
seen making his way through a churning crowd of soldiers. I thought of the
recruit and of the young peasant woman, and I felt almost as though I had
fallen in love with her across the years, just as I loved Russia, and there was
something that united all three – Lenin, the movement, this couple – in my
mind, and together they captured my spirit and filled me with happiness. I
could not quite understand what it was about this recruit, his dead wife and
our shared connection to Russia that had made me feel this way. Perhaps it
was just the excitement of those unprecedented days we were living through
and the sense of a better future. I don’t know.

                                       •
The façade of the Hotel Metropole, just below the roof, was decorated with
a mosaic reproduction of Vrubel’s The Princess of the Dream. The mosaic
had been badly damaged by gunfire.
   It was in the Metropole that the Central Executive Committee (TsIK), the
parliament of the time, met. The TsIK held its sessions in what had formerly
been the restaurant. A cement fountain devoid of water stood in the middle.
To the left of the fountain and in the centre (as viewed from the dais) sat the
Bolsheviks and Left SRs, and to the right the Mensheviks, SRs and
Internationalists, small in numbers but quite vociferous. I often attended the
sessions. I loved to arrive quite early, before they had started, take a seat in
a recess not far from the dais, and read. I enjoyed the hall’s dim light, its
echoing emptiness, the two or three bulbs glowing in the crystal wall
sconces deep in the corners and even that hotel smell of dusty carpets that
no amount of airing could dispel. But most of all I enjoyed waiting for that
hour when the merciless debates and brilliant speeches began and the empty
hall would be transformed into an arena of stormy historical events.
   Rozovsky and Shchelkunov were among the journalists regularly
attending the sessions. Rozovsky had a knack for predicting the exact
amount of heat an upcoming debate would generate. ‘Hold tight!’ he would
warn us. ‘There’s going to be fireworks today.’ At other times he would say
with a bored yawn: ‘They’ve got tea at the buffet, let’s go. They’re just
going to be splitting legislative hairs for a while.’
   For some reason Shchelkunov was afraid of Sverdlov, chairman of the
TsIK.2 He was particularly disturbed by Sverdlov’s intense, piercing gaze,
and if he happened to direct it at us journalists, Shchelkunov immediately
looked away or ducked behind his neighbour’s back. A short, pale man in a
shabby leather jacket, Sverdlov conveyed an impression of iron will with
every word and gesture. His deep bass, which belied his sickly appearance,
could subdue even his most resolute and fearless opponents, such as the
Mensheviks Martov and Dan.3
   Martov sat closest to the journalists, and we managed to examine him
thoroughly. Tall, thin and fierce, a torn scarf wound around his sinewy neck,
he was always jumping up, interrupting the speaker and shouting out
impatient words in a hoarse, staccato voice. The instigator of every storm,
he could not be silenced except by being stripped of his right to speak or
suspended for a few sessions. He was rarely in a peaceful mood. On those
occasions, he would join us journalists, borrow a book from somebody and
lose himself in it, oblivious to time, space and whatever was going on
around him in this hall with a fountain.
   One day he borrowed A History of Islam from Rozovsky. Engrossed in
the book, he sank deeper and deeper into his chair, his long spin-dly legs
stretched out in front of him. A decree on sending workers’ brigades out
into the countryside to requisition grain was being discussed. Martov and
Dan showed no signs of derailing the debate, and so slowly everyone
relaxed. Newspapers rustled, pencils scratched. Sverdlov removed his hand
from the bell and, smiling, listened to his neighbour’s remarks. That more
than anything else set everyone at ease, for Sverdlov almost never smiled.
The list of speakers was nearing the end when Martov stirred and asked for
the floor in an apathetic voice. The audience tensed and began muttering in
anticipation.
   Martov, shuffling slowly from side to side, made his way up onto the
dais, cast a pair of vacant eyes over the hall and began to speak, softly,
almost reluctantly, noting that the decree on the dispatch of workers’
requisitioning brigades needed, if you please, greater precision, both
legalistically and stylistically. For example, clause such-and-such in the
decree must be expressed more clearly, cutting a number of unnecessary
words, such as ‘in the interest of’, which would read better as simply ‘for’,
while clause such-and-such contained a clear repetition of something
already said in a previous section of the decree.
   Martov dug around in his notes for a long time but couldn’t find what he
was looking for and shrugged his shoulders in annoyance. The audience
convinced itself that there would be no outburst. Newspapers began rustling
once more. Rozovsky, who had predicted an explosion, couldn’t believe it.
‘He’s simply evaporated, like so much liquid ammonia,’ he whispered to
me. ‘Let’s go to the buffet.’
   Suddenly, everyone sat up. At first I didn’t understand what had
happened. Martov’s voice was thundering from the dais, practically shaking
the walls. It seethed with rage. He had torn his dull, dry notes to pieces and
flung them in the air, and they were now falling softly like snowflakes and
settling on the chairs in the front row. Martov was shaking his clenched fists
and shouting so hard he was practically choking.
   ‘This is treason! You came up with this decree just so you could clear
Moscow and Petrograd of every last discontented worker – the finest
flowers of the proletariat! Your aim is nothing less than to use this decree to
squash the healthy protest of the working class!’
   There was a moment’s silence, and then everyone leapt out of their seats.
A storm of cries filled the hall. Some of them rose above the din: ‘Sit
down!’ ‘Traitor!’ ‘Bravo, Martov!’ ‘How dare he!’ ‘The truth hurts!’
Sverdlov rang his bell furiously, calling Martov to order, but he kept on
shouting, more vehemently than before. He had lulled the hall to sleep with
his feigned indifference and was now revelling in their dismay. Sverdlov
ordered Martov to stop, but he kept on going. Sverdlov suspended Martov
for three sessions, but he ignored him and kept on making accusations, each
one more wicked than the last. Finally, Sverdlov summoned the guard. Only
then did Martov descend from the dais and slowly, deliberately exit the hall
to the accompaniment of a raucous chorus of whistling, stamping, clapping
and shouting.
   Practically every session of the TsIK caused the walls at the Metropole to
shake. Fights were often picked by the Mensheviks and SRs for the silliest
of reasons – a speaker’s ill-chosen word or his manner of speech.
Sometimes instead of indignant shouts, they greeted a speaker with sardonic
laughter or, at a speaker’s first words, all stood up at once and walked out
together, conversing in loud voices as they left. Their behaviour reflected a
mixture of impotence and childish bravado. They turned protest into
playground tussles.
   The whole life of the country had been shaken to its thousand-year-old
roots. These were threatening times, full of vague forebodings,
expectations, ruthless passions and contradictions. This made it all the more
difficult to understand such behaviour, this loud and pointless nonsense.
Apparently, their party doctrines were more important to them than the fate
of the country or the happiness of the ordinary people. There was something
artificial and speculative in these doctrines that had been formulated in
smoky cafés and meeting rooms far from Russia and its day-to-day life.
Their intent on forcing the future to fit their abstract émigré theories proved
both their contempt for people’s actual lives and their ignorance of Russian
reality.
   One session of the TsIK stood out for its deep solemnity. That was just
days after the murder of Count Mirbach, the German ambassador. The
German government issued an ultimatum demanding that German military
units be allowed into the country for the ostensible purpose of protecting
their embassy on Denezhny Lane and that the entire area be ceded to
German authority. A more brazen and cynical ultimatum would be difficult
to imagine. A special session of the TsIK was called immediately after the
receipt of the ultimatum.
   I remember well that muggy summer day declining towards sunset. The
whole city was bathed in the pale gleams of the sun reflected in its windows
and the yellowish shadows of the late afternoon. I entered the hall with the
fountain and was struck by the silence despite the large gathering. I didn’t
even notice a faint murmur of whispers. The pendulum of the wall clock
ticked its regular beat. But for me and, I think, for everyone else, time had
stopped and only this soft, dying sound remained. Sverdlov came in, rang
the bell and in an emotionless voice said that the chairman of the Council of
People’s Commissars, Vladimir Ilyich Lenin, would be making a statement.
A shudder swept through the audience. Everyone knew that Lenin was ill
and his doctors had forbidden him from speaking in public.
   Lenin walked quickly up to the dais. He looked pale and thin. A stark
white gauze bandage around his neck stood out against the colour of his
skin. He gripped the edge of the rostrum firmly and held the room in his
stare for quite some time. We could hear his laboured breathing. Softly and
slowly, one hand now pressed against his throat, Lenin said that the Council
of People’s Commissars had categorically rejected the impudent ultimatum
of the German government and decided to mobilise immediately all the
armed forces of the Russian Federation. In utter silence, arms were raised
and then lowered in favour of the government’s actions.
   Shaken by what we had heard, we walked out of the Metropole onto
Teatralnaya Square. Dusk had fallen over Moscow by now, and a Red Army
unit, bristling with bayonets at the ready, went marching past the hotel.


1 A minority faction broke from the Socialist Revolutionaries in 1917 to
form the Left SRs, who abandoned support of the Provisional Government
in favour of the Bolsheviks and a radicalisation of the revolution. The Left
SRs themselves split with the Bolsheviks after the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk.
2 Yakov Sverdlov (1885–1919), early Bolshevik and chairman of the
Central Executive Committee of the All-Russian Congress of Soviets.
3 Fëdor Dan (1871–1947), a founder of the Menshevik Party, opponent of
the Bolshevik coup.

                          OceanofPDF.com
74
The Zone of Silence



Every    once in a while, I had the day off. I liked to walk to Noevsky
Gardens on the other side of the city or wander about the outskirts, usually
beyond Presnya and Devichee Field. Those were hungry times. An eighth
of a pound of black bread was the daily ration. I took my eighth, two or
three apples (my neighbour Lipochka supplied me with them) and a book,
and headed out for the whole day until dark.
   The outskirts of Moscow differed little from what were then called
Russia’s ‘downgraded’ towns, places that had lost their status as
administrative centres. A ring of these quiet suburbs circled the enormous,
agitated capital, whose hum did not impinge on them. Only rarely did a gust
of wind from Moscow carry all the way out here, along with a swirl of dust,
the distant notes of ‘The Internationale’ or the crackle of gunfire. Brief gun
battles in the streets were rather common then. They erupted suddenly and
ended just as suddenly. The suburbs were empty. This was what attracted
me to them the most. I don’t know what I liked better – the short break from
these stressful days in the city or the search for some peace and quiet, a
place where I might relax, calm myself and take a look at what was
happening around me from a different angle, and so, perhaps, make some
sense of it all.
   These visits always filled me with the conviction that before me lay the
most varied and diverse kind of life, perhaps even too much so. Why it was
I felt this so strongly here, on the outskirts of Moscow, I still don’t know. I
would look around at the neglected back alleys overgrown with weedy
grass, some faded laundry drying on a line, and think how I would surely
come back in a few years to understand how much I had changed while in
the meantime this same spot was still just as forgotten and unchanged as
before. The peeling church domes would have the same dull sheen and the
bone-dry washing would flap in the wind as before, while I, perhaps, would
have travelled, written books and, best of all, fallen in love. It was as
though I were calling on this back alley to bear witness to my life. I wanted
to use this corner of Moscow to mark my passage through time.
    But I was wrong, of course. When I returned to Moscow five years later
and went back to one of these little spots, I saw a new white building
surrounded by young lime trees and a sign in front identifying it as such-
and-such district school of music.
    The outskirts had their charm – the crooked old wooden houses being
held up by heavy beams blackened with age, the long-abandoned little
manufactories, their boilers red with rust and lying on their sides among the
weeds, the timber sheds smelling of birch bark. There was charm in the
little benches, buffed to a bright gloss over the years, standing at gateways
where so many sunflower shells had been trodden into the ground that it
had turned as hard as asphalt. There was charm in the roads soft with
goosegrass, and in the raised barriers at the crossings of disused railway
lines. Black locomotives with gaping funnels, most likely from the time of
Stephenson, stood on the tracks, their fires extinguished for good. Swallows
nested in the drivers’ cabs. There was also charm in the dark, ancient elms,
weak from age and almost devoid of leaves even at the height of summer, in
the slag heaps overgrown with dandelions, in the nest boxes and in the
fences made of broken iron bedsteads and church railings, all entwined with
bittersweet morning glory. Geraniums in old tins blazed on the windowsills,
looking as exotic as birds of paradise. In one yard I came upon a strange
sight – a kennel and inside it a carmine, black-tailed cock (taking the place
of the missing dog), chained by the foot, apparently to correct its insolent
and aggressive manner.
    I loved the fluff from the poplars rolling down the streets in light, silver-
grey coils; the mangy, miaowing kittens playing in the backyards; the old
women whose wrinkled faces appeared to have been carved out of knotty
brown wood; the nasturtiums with their fat round leaves and hooded red
flowers; the sparrows drinking from the puddles around the water pumps;
the fly-specked oleograph of The Ritual Kiss seen through the open window
of a darkened room along with a bored canary in its cage, a potted ficus, a
broken and crudely glued-together porcelain setter and a moth-eaten stuffed
oriole; or the smoke rising straight up into the white sky from a crooked
samovar out in the middle of a yard. As everyone knows, when a crooked
samovar sends up straight smoke, a heat wave is coming.
   Some child had scrawled the words ‘Heaven’, ‘Hell’, ‘Treasure Island’
and ‘Winter Palace’ in charcoal on a few enormous cement pipes that lay
abandoned in a vacant plot. Apparently the ‘Winter Palace’ had recently
come under attack – it was marked by fresh red scars from flying bricks.
Now and then the wind filled the street with the smell of stagnant water and
tomato plants. The houses backed onto leafy green kitchen gardens. Instead
of scarecrows, pinwheels made of shiny coloured paper twirled on tall
sticks placed among the beds. In the distance, above the dust and the dull
haze, the cupolas of Moscow and the great dome of Christ the Saviour
Cathedral, like the helmet of some medieval knight, shone dark gold. The
clouds, lushly whipped egg whites with a slight pinkish tint from the sun,
rose high over the churches. Seen from here, Moscow belonged to Asia – a
heathen temple of Orthodox saints sculpted out of brown clay or cast in
iron, the cylindrical towers of the Kremlin wreathed in the endlessly
ascending flights of the pigeons.
   The slimy ponds on the edge of the city were particularly nice. Sunken
tins gleamed through their water, as green as olive oil. Rotting piles,
dangling thin strands of slime, stuck up out of the water at odd angles. It all
smelled like a chemist’s shop. Along the shore, willows, their trunks
scorched by lightning strikes, bowed over the water and provided shade. I
liked to read in that shade, sitting on the warm ground and watching the
marsh gases bubbling up from the depths, one round sphere after another.
Long-legged insects scurried over the surface. The local boys called them
‘water-racers’. If you tossed a match into the pond, they would all race over
and inspect it as a group, and then, as soon as they had convinced
themselves it wasn’t edible, scuttle away just as fast. Into every one of these
ponds, frothy water was forever gushing from some old rusty pipe. Clouds
of fry gathered in the water beneath the mouth of the pipes. The boys made
steamships out of strips of wood. Girls hitched up their skirts and waded in
to rinse the family laundry. They squealed every time some invisible water-
creature darted around their feet. The girls swore that it must be leeches.
   At one of these ponds I often met a glum man in torn overalls. He lived
off his kitchen garden and the fish he caught in the ponds. He would plant
five or six rods in the banks and every so often catch a small carp no bigger
than a five-kopeck coin. The old man would sit there hour after hour,
nibbling away on his black bread, just like me. I struck up a conversation
with him and he took me to see his garden. It seemed to me more beautiful
than the most luxurious rose garden. Its green freshness was full of the rich
smell of dill and mint.
   ‘So you see, my friend,’ he said, ‘it just so happens this too is a way of
life. There are all sorts of ways to live. You can fight for freedom, you can
try to remake humanity or you can grow tomatoes. Everything has its own
price, its own dignity and its own glory.’
   ‘What exactly are you trying to say?’ I asked.
   ‘That we need to be tolerant and understanding. As I see it, that’s the
only path to real freedom. All of us should devote ourselves to the work we
like best, and no one should try to stop us. Then nothing can frighten us,
and no enemy can stop us.’
   I liked to walk through the kitchen gardens and waste ground, where
jagged splinters of sunlight from shards of broken glass stabbed my eyes, to
the Moscow River, its low bank covered in thick greenery that spilled down
from Noevsky Gardens. Slight films of oil formed twirling rainbows on the
water’s surface reminiscent of a Gypsy’s shawl. A boy with a boat would
row me across the river to the gardens on the other side. The tall lime trees
there with their shadows lent the area a certain grandeur. The trees were in
bloom. Their strong smell seemed as though it had somehow been
transported here from some springtime in a far-off southern clime. I loved
to imagine this spring. The picture in my mind made me love the world
even more. Having no one to share my feelings with, the only thing for me
to do was jot them down on paper, which I did. I soon misplaced these
notes, although without any regret. I was ashamed of them. They were
completely at odds with those savage days.
   Noevsky Gardens had long been famous for its flowers, but it had
gradually fallen into decline and run wild, and by the time of the revolution
all that remained was a small conservatory. Nonetheless, a few old women
and one old male gardener carried on the work there. They soon grew used
to my visits and even began to talk to me about their troubles. The gardener
complained that flowers were now only requested for funerals and state
occasions. Every time he said this, one of the women – she was thin with
bright, pale eyes – looked embarrassed for him and liked to assure me that
very soon they would most likely be growing flowers to plant in the city
squares and to sell to people on the streets.
   ‘No matter what you say,’ she would always try to convince me, although
I had never once contradicted her, ‘people simply can’t live without
flowers. Take lovers, for instance. There always have been, are now, and
always will be. And can you tell me a better way than flowers to express
your love? Nope, our profession will never die out.’
   Sometimes the gardener cut some stocks or carnations for me. I was
ashamed to carry them through hungry, anxious Moscow, and so I always
wrapped them up in paper in such a way that no one could tell what I had in
my hand. One day the paper came undone on the tram. I didn’t notice until
an elderly woman in a white kerchief asked me: ‘Where did you find such
beauties at a time like this?’
   ‘Careful how you hold them,’ the conductor said. ‘Or someone’ll push up
against you and crush them. You know how people are these days.’
   ‘Who’s pushing?’ a sailor with a heavy cartridge belt asked in a
threatening manner. His eyes landed on a knife grinder trying to squeeze
through the passengers, dragging his machine behind him. ‘Where d’you
think you’re going? Can’t you see – the guy here’s got flowers. Clumsy oaf
!’
   ‘My, aren’t we sensitive!’ jeered the grinder sarcastically. ‘And him in
the navy no less!’
   ‘You leave the navy out of this, or I’ll give you something to cry about!’
   ‘Oh Lord! All this over some flowers!’ sighed a young mother holding
her infant. ‘You know, my husband, such a serious, respectable man, he
brought me cherry blossoms in hospital when I had this little one here, he’s
my first.’
   I became aware of someone behind me breathing heavily, followed by a
whisper, so soft that at first I didn’t know where it was coming from. I
turned round. A pale little girl of about ten, in a faded pink frock, was
staring at me imploringly with eyes as grey and round as pewter saucers.
‘Uncle,’ she said in a hoarse and somehow strange voice, ‘give me a
flower! Please, please, give me one.’
   I gave her a carnation. The girl took it and then began pushing her way
with every bit of strength through the passengers, who were now muttering
with envy and indignation, towards the rear platform. In an instant she
jumped from the moving tram and disappeared.
   ‘Crazy fool!’ said the conductor. ‘The girl must be out of her mind! We’d
all ask for a flower if we didn’t have a conscience!’
   I pulled out one more carnation and gave it to her. She, an older woman,
blushed and looked down at the flower, her eyes radiant and welling with
tears. Immediately, several hands reached out to me. I gave away the rest of
the flowers and then noticed that there, in that battered tram, I was now
surrounded by more friendly smiles, more shining eyes, more joy than I had
ever seen before or since. It was as though dazzling sunlight had burst into
that grubby tram and brought all these weary, anxious people back to life.
They wished me happiness, good health, the most beautiful bride in the
world and Lord knows what else.
   A bony elderly man in a worn black jacket lowered his close-cropped
head, opened his canvas satchel and carefully laid his flower inside. I could
swear I saw a tear fall from his eye. It was more than I could stand, and so I
hopped off before we reached the next stop. As I walked I kept thinking
about the memories – whether sad or happy – that the flower must have
brought to life for this man and wondered for how long he had carried these
feelings inside him until his heart had at last broken and caused him to cry
in front of us strangers. Everyone, I am sure, treasures in their soul some
memory, as delicate as the scent of the lime trees in Noevsky Gardens, of a
glimmer of happiness long buried under the squalor of everyday life.
   Wandering the outskirts of Moscow and through Noevsky Gardens, I
escaped into a zone of silence that lay so improbably close to the city. These
escapes from the overwhelming tumult of Moscow were understandable.
Everything was happening so fast that events didn’t even have the time to
follow one after another, but piled up in great heaps all at once, each and
every day. Yet just a few steps away from this cataclysmic upheaval, normal
life went on as before. This too, no doubt, had its own logic.

                             OceanofPDF.com
75
Revolt



The empty stage of the Bolshoi Theatre was set for the scene of the Palace
of the Facets from Boris Godunov. A woman in a black dress, clicking her
heels, came running out onto the stage and up to the footlights. A scarlet
carnation was pinned to her bodice. From a distance she looked young, but
in the glare of the lights you could see that her yellow face was covered
with fine wrinkles and her eyes possessed a sickly, rheumy lustre. The
woman was clutching a small steel Browning in her hand. She raised it over
her head, stamped her feet and let out a piercing cry: ‘Long live the
uprising!’
   The hall cried out in response: ‘Long live the uprising!’
   The woman was the well-known Socialist Revolutionary Maria
Spiridonova.1 This is how we journalists learned about the outbreak of the
Left SR revolt in Moscow. A great many events had led up to this moment.
   The Congress of Soviets was in session. No one had better seats at the
congress than the journalists. We had been seated in the orchestra pit and
could see and hear everything perfectly from there. Of all the speakers the
only one I remember well was Lenin, and not what he said, but his gestures
and manner of speaking. He sat close to the table, hunched over, and
writing quickly. It looked as if he were paying no attention to the other
speakers. All you could see was his bulging forehead and the occasional
mocking glint of his squinting eyes directed at the speaker. From time to
time he looked up from his notes and uttered some light-hearted or biting
comment in response to one of the speeches. The audience would erupt with
laughter and applause. Lenin would lean back in his chair and let out an
infectious laugh.
   He did not ‘lecture’, but spoke in a simple, relaxed manner, as if he were
talking with a friend and not before an enormous auditorium. He spoke
without pathos, without pomposity, in a plain, everyday manner, with a
slight rolling of his r’s, all of which lent an air of sincerity to his words.
Sometimes, however, he would pause for a moment and then speak with a
steely voice free of the slightest doubt. He walked back and forth across the
stage as he spoke, his hands thrust into his trouser pockets or casually
holding the armholes of his black waistcoat. There was nothing the least bit
monumental about him, no awareness of his own greatness, no desire to
utter sacred truths. He was simple and natural in word and gesture. You
could tell from his eyes that along with matters of state, he was just as
happy at a spare moment to talk about any sort of human activity or
endeavour, be it foraging for mushrooms, fishing or the need for scientific
weather forecasting.
   At the congress Lenin spoke about the country’s need for peace and
breathing space, about food and bread. The word ‘bread’, which in the
mouths of other speakers sounded like some abstract, purely statistical
concept, became something real and concrete when Lenin spoke, that very
black bread for which the country hungered at the time. But in no way did
this diminish the weight of his words or their political importance.
   Sitting in one of the boxes during the congress was the German
ambassador, Count Mirbach – a tall, balding and haughty man with a
monocle. At the time the Germans occupied Ukraine, where peasant
uprisings had been breaking out, raging and then dying away, in various
regions. On the very first day of the congress the Left SR Kamkov took the
floor. He unleashed an angry speech against the Germans, demanding a
break with Germany, immediate war and support for the insurgents. An
alarmed commotion spread through the hall. Kamkov marched almost right
up to the box where Mirbach was sitting and screamed at him: ‘Long live
the uprising in Ukraine! Down with the German occupation! Down with
Mirbach!’
   The Left SRs leapt from their seats. They shouted and shook their fists at
Mirbach. Kamkov shook his fist too, and when his jacket fell open, you
could see a revolver hanging from his belt. Mirbach sat unperturbed, not
even removing his monocle, and continued reading his newspaper. The
cries, whistles and stamping of feet rose to an impossible din. It seemed that
at any moment the massive chandelier would come crashing down and the
plaster mouldings would break loose from the walls. Even Sverdlov, with
his powerful voice, couldn’t bring the hall under control. He kept ringing
his bell, but only the journalists in the orchestra pit could hear it. The sound
couldn’t make its way out into the hall, now given over to wild shouts.
Finally, Sverdlov closed the meeting. Mirbach stood and slowly walked out
of the box, leaving his newspaper on the railing.
   The theatre’s hallways were jammed, and it was impossible to squeeze
through the crowds. The guards had thrown open all the doors, but
nonetheless the theatre emptied slowly. Emotions were running so high that
physical confrontations and violence could have broken out at any moment.
Yet, despite everyone’s fears, the rest of the day in Moscow passed with
unexpected calm.

                                      •

The next day, 6 July, I arrived early at the Bolshoi Theatre, only to find the
orchestra pit already filled with the other journalists. Everyone had come
early expecting something to happen. We waited for a brief statement from
the government regarding yesterday’s demonstration by the Left SRs. The
hall was full. The meeting had been set for two o’clock in the afternoon.
But when the time arrived, the presidium’s table remained empty. Another
half-hour passed. Still the meeting did not begin. Puzzled murmurs floated
throughout the hall.
   Then Smidovich, secretary of the Soviet of People’s Commissars,
appeared on the stage and said the session would be somewhat delayed and
asked the Bolsheviks to join him at a nearby building for a party meeting.
The Bolsheviks left. The hall emptied. No one but the Left SRs remained.
Everyone now understood that only something extraordinary could account
for the delay in the day’s session. The journalists bolted for the telephones
to call their editors and ask what had happened. But an armed Red Army
soldier stood guard over each telephone and no one was allowed near. The
theatre’s exits had all been locked and were watched by armed guards. They
were under orders not to let anyone leave.
   Soon, a rumour of unknown origin began to spread through the theatre
that Count Mirbach had been killed three hours earlier at his embassy. The
journalists were seized with panic. The Left SRs silently got up and went to
sit by the exits. Strange sounds from outside could be heard in the theatre –
a muffled crash followed by heavy pounding, as if wooden piles were being
driven into the ground not far from the theatre. A grey-haired usher
beckoned me over with his finger and said: ‘If you wish to know what’s
going on in the city, take that iron staircase up to the flies. But don’t let
anyone see you. You’ll find a tiny window off to the left up there. Have a
look-see. You really ought to. Oh, what troubles! Dear Lord, save and
protect us!’
   I carefully climbed the steep iron stairs (there was no railing) up to a
small, dusty window, more like a narrow slit cut into the thick wall. I
looked and could see the far edge of Teatralnaya Square and one side of the
Hotel Metropole. From the direction of the City Duma Red Army men were
running crouched forward towards the Metropole, dropping suddenly to the
pavement, quickly firing from their rifles, and then getting back up and
running on. Then, from off to the left in the direction of Lubyanskaya
Square, came the staccato clatter of a machine-gun and the boom of a
cannon. It was now clear that while we had been sitting locked in the
theatre with the Left SRs, an uprising had begun in Moscow.
   I quietly returned to the orchestra pit. Just then Spiridonova came
running out onto the stage and the scene with which I began this chapter
took place. It all became perfectly clear – it was the Left SRs who had
started the uprising. In reply to Spiridonova’s cry all the Left SRs drew
revolvers from their pockets and out from under their jackets. But at that
very moment the calm, stern voice of the Kremlin commandant rang out
from the gallery: ‘Ladies and gentlemen, Left SRs! If you make one move
to leave the theatre or to use your weapons, we shall open fire on the whole
hall from the upper gallery. I advise you to sit quietly and await your fate.’
   None of us journalists cared to perish due to the negligence of the guards,
who had, evidently, forgotten to let us out in time. We sent a delegation
headed by Oleg Leonidov to speak to the commandant. He replied, politely
but firmly, that, unfortunately, he had not received any instructions about
the journalists. Eventually, however, he gave in to our pleas and ordered all
of us to gather quietly in the vestibule of the theatre, where the guards
quickly threw open the doors and pushed us out into Teatralnaya Square. At
first, after the dim light of the theatre, I was blinded by the setting sun.
Suddenly, a bullet struck the column beside me, hissed and then seemed to
fly off in the direction it had come from. After this, as if upon someone’s
order, bullets started methodically cracking along the length of the wall,
fortunately above our heads.
   ‘To Kopievsky Lane!’ Leonidov yelled out, bending over towards the
ground and then racing around the corner of the theatre. The rest of us ran
after him.
   Around the corner everything was calm. The bullets were still flying by,
and closely, but off to the side. We could tell only by the light whistling
sound and the bursting glass and the puffs of white plaster erupting like
fountains off the building across from the theatre. As Shchelkunov was
running a tattered old book fell out of his briefcase. Several times he turned
and tried to run back around the corner to retrieve it, but we held him by his
arms and wouldn’t let him go. Eventually he managed to break free,
crawled across the ground to the book and returned flushed and covered in
dirt, but happy.
   ‘You and those books of yours, you’re a dangerous maniac!’ Leonidov
yelled at him. ‘You’re mad!’
   ‘What?!’ Shchelkunov shot back. ‘This happens to be a first edition of
Rousseau’s Confessions. You’re the one who’s mad, not me.’
   The gunfire quickly moved away beyond Lubyanskaya Square. The Left
SRs were retreating. Back at the newspaper I learned that Count Mirbach
had indeed been killed that morning by the Left SR Blyumkin. This had
been the signal for the uprising. The rebels had managed to seize the
Pokrovsky Barracks and the telegraph office on Myasnitskaya Street and
advanced almost all the way to Lubyanskaya Square. The Left SRs in the
theatre had all been arrested soon after we had been let out. By that evening
the rebels had been forced out of the city and retreated to the goods station
on the Kazan Railway and the main road to Ryazan, where they began to
disperse.
   As suddenly as it had begun, the uprising was over.


1Maria Spiridonova (1884–1941), longtime revolutionary, key figure in the
Left SRs, imprisoned by the Bolsheviks in 1918, executed under Stalin.

                             OceanofPDF.com
76
Material for a History of Russian Houses



Sometimes the history of houses can be more interesting than the lives of
people. Houses last longer and are witnesses to several generations. Local
historians are the only ones who take the trouble to study the history of old
houses, and it’s normal for these historians to be treated with condescension
as harmless lunatics. Yet it’s these same people who collect our history one
little bit at a time and teach us to know and love our country and its
traditions.
    I am convinced that if we could reconstruct the history of some old house
in every last detail, to follow the lives of everyone who had lived there, to
describe their ways of life, and to learn everything that had happened there,
we would end up with a great roman de mœurs perhaps more revealing than
the novels of Balzac. Moreover, the life of every house is joined together
with quite a number of things that have also been around for a long time
and experienced their own extensive and revealing journeys. Unfortunately,
such a history is well-nigh impossible. Things don’t talk, and people are
forgetful, lack for curiosity, and treat their faithful though inanimate
assistants with insulting carelessness.
    Things are crafted by human hands, like for example Pinocchio, who was
carved out of a knotty log by the old carpenter Geppetto. Pinocchio came to
life and started a train of events such as only a magical fairy could sort out.
If things really could come to life, what a mess they would unleash in our
lives and how much richer history would be. They would have something to
say.
    No one can say for certain how many large, private homes there were in
Moscow before the October Revolution. People say at least three hundred.
These were mostly merchants’ homes. Only a few of them belonged to the
nobility. Nearly all their urban mansions had burned down back in 1812.
Following the October Revolution, the anarchists seized most of these
homes of the Moscow merchants. They enjoyed life amid all the fine old
antique furniture, chandeliers and rugs, and treated these furnishings in their
own distinctive way. Paintings were used for target practice with their
Mausers. Exquisite rugs replaced tarpaulins to cover the stacks of cartridge
cases out in the yard. Rare books from the library were used to board up the
windows as protection against gunfire. Ballrooms with intricate parquet
floors served as dormitories for the anarchists and all sorts of dubious
characters.
   Moscow was ripe with rumours about the dissolute lives of the anarchists
in these mansions. Prim old ladies whispered in horror among themselves
of abominable orgies. But these were not orgies, just the usual drinking
bouts at which hooch instead of champagne was drunk to help wash down
salted fish as hard as rock. They were a collection of riff-raff, strung-out
youths and neurotic girls – a forerunner to the Makhno gang1 right in the
heart of Moscow. The anarchists even had their own theatre. It was called
Izid. Its posters advertised it as a ‘theatre of mysticism, eroticism and
spiritual anarchy’ that was devoted to ‘an idea raised to the point of
fanaticism’. What this idea was, the posters didn’t say. Every time I came
across one of these posters, I thought to myself that Rachinsky must
somehow be involved with the theatre.
   I was writing my first novel and often stayed at the newspaper’s office
late into the night or even until morning. I slept on our battered old editorial
sofa with its broken springs. It sometimes happened that in the middle of
the night a spring would snap and give me a good smack in the ribs. I
preferred to write in the office instead of my sleepy and musty lodgings
where the tap dripped in the bathroom and the landlady was always
shuffling around outside my door in her slippers. The light in my room
bothered her, and she got up several times during the night to check the
electricity meter.
   Back at the newspaper, I usurped Kuskova’s expansive, carpeted office
with its large writing desk. Sometimes I fell asleep at this desk for ten or
fifteen minutes and then woke up rested and refreshed. The office cat slept
on the desk opposite me, his paws tucked in. Now and then he would open
his eyes just wide enough to give me a friendly look, as if to say: ‘Working,
are you? All right then, go on, keep at it! I’ll just have another little
snooze.’ But then one night, the cat woke with a start. His ears twitched this
way and that. He stared at me with eyes as green as gooseberries and let out
a hoarse miaow.
   I listened and caught the sound of gunfire. It crackled somewhere in the
dark streets and then started to get closer. The intensity of the shooting
made it clear this was not just some random street fight.
   Just then the phone rang. The sound made me jump. The Moscow news
editor was on the line. ‘They’ve started disarming the anarchists!’ he
shouted into the receiver. ‘They’ve launched raids on the houses. It’s a good
thing you’re at the office. I’m on my way, but in the meantime, do me a
favour and head over to the Morozov house on Vozdvizhenka Street and see
what’s going on. But be careful.’
   I went out into the street. It was dark and deserted. Wild shooting was
coming from the direction of Malaya Dmitrovka Street, where the
anarchists were entrenched in the former Merchants’ Club and had even set
up two field guns at the gate. I picked my way through some back streets
until I came to the Morozov house on Vozdvizhenka Street. Every
Muscovite knew this house with its grey, sea-shell-encrusted walls which
looked like some sort of fanciful castle. The house was dark. It looked black
and sinister. I climbed the granite steps to the heavy front doors, so massive
they reminded me of the bronze doors of a medieval cathedral. I listened.
Not a sound came from within. I decided that the anarchists must have left,
but knocked, cautiously, just the same.
   Suddenly, the door flew open without a sound. Someone grabbed me by
the arm and pulled me inside. The door slammed shut. I found myself in
utter darkness. Several people held me tightly.
   ‘What’s the matter?’ I asked calmly. The question sounded ridiculous,
even to me. It was obvious what was the matter, and I could guess the
matter might end quite poorly for me.
   ‘He’s obviously an agent,’ a young woman’s voice said close to my ear.
‘We’ve got to report him to Comrade Ognevoi.’
   ‘Hold on,’ I said, trying to talk my way out of this. ‘The days of the
Count of Monte Cristo have come and gone. Turn on a light and I’ll explain
everything to you. Please, just let me go.’
   ‘Well, ain’t that something,’ said the same woman’s voice. ‘He’d like us
to let him go. You’re nothin’ but a rat, a Bolshevik spy, and you’re goin’
nowhere. But I promise not to touch a hair on that pretty lil’ head of yours
unless you start something funny. Got it?’
   It was clear this kind of talk was not natural to her. She had picked it up
recently and was trying it out for the first time. I lost my temper.
   ‘Queen of Anarchy,’ I said in the direction of the invisible woman, ‘stop
playing the fool. You’ve been reading too many cheap novels. It’s bad for
you at your age.’
   ‘Search him and then lock him up in the corner drawing room to the left,’
she said in an icy voice, as though she had not heard me. ‘I’ll report to
Comrade Ognevoi.’
   ‘Do what you like!’ I snapped. ‘Go ahead and report me to Comrade
Ognevoi or whoever you want. I don’t give a damn what you do!’
   ‘Watch it. You’ll be sorry for talk like that, you rat!’ the woman said.
   Two men led me down a dark corridor. One of them was wearing a
leather jacket. It felt cold against my hand. Their mouths shut, they dragged
me up and down several narrow flights of stairs, shoved me into a room,
locked the door from the outside, took away the key and said that they
would shoot me through the door if I tried to make any noise, and then they
left. I heard one of them say to me in a surprisingly calm voice as they
turned to go: ‘That’s no way for a spy to act, you Bolshevik scum. If you
worked for us, I’d show you a thing or two.’
   I had a box of matches with me, but I couldn’t bring myself to light one
to have a look around. Who knew what these anarchists were capable of.
They might think I was sending a signal and start shooting through the door.
I went over and felt it. The door was covered with intricate carving. Next I
began to run my hands over the walls. I caught a fingernail on some silk
panelling and jumped with fright. Finally, I came to a large armchair, sat
down and began to wait.
   At first, I found the whole affair amusing. The anarchists really had taken
me for a spy. I found this completely ridiculous, but there was nothing I
could do about it. And what about this young woman? Her voice seemed
familiar. I searched my memory and recalled once hearing an anarchist with
the same voice at a demonstration near the Gogol Monument. She had a
long black fringe, greedy, cocaine-addled eyes and huge turquoise earrings.
The crowd shouted her down and wouldn’t let her finish, so she had pulled
out a cigarette, lit it, and then walked off, swinging her hips and smiling
contemptuously. Yes, of course, it was her.
   I was happy to go on sitting in the soft, comfortable chair and to wait and
see what would happen next. I was certain they would let me go the
moment I showed them my press card from the People’s Power. Over an
hour passed. I could hear rifle fire in the distance and once there was the
muffled sound of a large explosion. I was dying for a cigarette. Finally, I
couldn’t hold out any longer. I sat down on the floor behind the chair,
pulled out a cigarette and struck a match. It flared up brightly, like
magnesium, and for an instant illuminated the semicircular room. The flame
bounced around the walls, reflecting off several mirrors and crystal vases. I
hurried to light my cigarette and then blew out the match, at which point I
noticed why it had burned so brightly – the head on it was double the
normal size.
   The next thing I knew the windows began shattering from rifle fire out in
the street. Plaster showered from the ceiling. I stayed on the floor and didn’t
move. The shooting was getting stronger. It occurred to me that the flame
from my match might have served as a signal to the Red Guards who had
quietly surrounded the house. They were mostly shooting at the windows in
my room. Bullets hit the chandelier. I could hear the crystals shatter as they
hit the floor. I had unwittingly played the role of a spy that the anarchists
had cast me in. I realised now that my position was not a good one. If the
anarchists had noticed the light from my match, they would soon burst
through the door and shoot me.
   But apparently the anarchists didn’t see the match, or they had much
bigger things to worry about now. They were shooting back. I could hear
steps running down the hall and something heavy rolling right behind – no
doubt a machine-gun. Someone was swearing and shouting to the others:
‘Four of you, up to the first floor! Stay away from the windows!’
   Something crashed to the ground and shattered. People charged past my
room, a window frame cracked, and that familiar woman’s voice sounded:
‘Over here, comrades! Through the hole in the wall!’ There was another
rush of noise and then all was silent. Now and then the Red Guards fired a
shot at one of the windows, as though testing to see whether anyone was
still hiding inside. Finally, the silence became complete. It seemed that the
anarchists had fled. This didn’t last long. Heavy footsteps pounded up and
down the halls again, I heard the sound of clanking rifles, and then voices:
‘Search the whole house! Turn on the lights!’ ‘Just look how fine they were
livin’ in here, the bastards!’ ‘Watch that corner – they could hit us with a
grenade from there.’ There was the sound of footsteps outside my door.
Someone was tugging hard on the handle, but the door wouldn’t open.
   ‘Locked himself in, the dog,’ came a scratchy voice.
   The door began to shake. I kept quiet. What could I do? There was no
point in trying to explain through the door that I had been captured and
locked in here by the anarchists. Who would believe me?
   ‘Open up, you bastard!’ I could now hear several different voices yelling
at me from the other side of the door. Next, one of them fired at the door
and it cracked. They began smashing it with their rifle butts. It began to
give way.
   ‘Built to last,’ said the scratchy voice admiringly.
   The door finally snapped in two, and the light of an electric torch hit me
square in the eyes.
   ‘Just one left!’ shouted a young Red Guardsman, a smile on his face. He
pointed his rifle at me. ‘All right, get up, you anarchist. Off to headquarters!
You’ve had your fun, but it’s all over now!’
   I went willingly to headquarters. It was located in a small house on
Povarskaya Street. There, at a desk in the front hall, sat an unbelievably thin
fair-haired man in a field jacket. He had a pointy little beard and amused
eyes and looked me over slowly. He smiled. I smiled back.
   ‘Well, let’s hear it,’ he said, lighting his pipe. ‘But keep it short. I don’t
have much time to waste on you.’
   I told him everything just as it had happened and showed him my press
card and identity papers. He barely glanced at them.
   ‘We ought to lock you up for a week or two for excessive curiosity. But
as of now that’s still not illegal. So clear off ! And I advise you to leave that
newspaper of yours. It’s useless. What’s wrong with you, anyway? You got
a problem with the Soviet government?’
   I answered that just the opposite, all my hopes for a little bit of happiness
for the Russian people depended on the new government.
   ‘Well, then,’ he said, squinting from the pipe smoke in his eyes, ‘we’ll do
our best to justify your trust in us, young man. We’re so flattered, truly we
are, just terribly flattered. Now get lost!’
   I went out into the street. I could still hear scattered gunfire. My face
burned from shame. The man had been mocking me. Deep down I knew
that he had been right, however, and that no matter what clever, cutting
replies I might think up now, in the end they would not disprove his
scornful words.
   By midday all the anarchists had been driven from their houses. Some of
them fled Moscow, others hid and gave up the struggle. The Muscovites
who had slept through the events of the night stared with amazement the
next day at the bullet-riddled houses, the porters sweeping up the piles of
broken glass, and the gaping hole in the wall of the Merchants’ Club on
Malaya Dmitrovka Street made by the only shell fired during the battle.
Back then, events happened so suddenly that it was quite possible to sleep
right through them.


1Nestor Makhno (1888–1953), Ukrainian anarchist and commander of the
Revolutionary Insurrectionary Army of Ukraine during the civil war.

                            OceanofPDF.com
77
A Few Explanations



The People’s Power was closed in the middle of the summer of 1918, just
like every other newspaper that called itself ‘independent’. Soon after I
received a letter from my sister, Galya, from Kopan. A railway guard from
Bryansk had dropped it off at my lodgings while I happened to be out, and
he left no information behind for me to look him up. The letter was tattered
and creased and stained with engine oil. It had travelled for over a month to
reach me in Moscow. Galya wrote:

  You promised Mama you’d come and visit in the spring, yet you still
  haven’t come and we’re losing hope of seeing you. Mama has aged a
  great deal in recent days. You wouldn’t recognise her. She goes days
  without saying a word, and then at night, when she thinks I’m asleep,
  she cries so loudly that even I can hear it, and I, dear Kostik, have lost
  almost all my hearing in the past year.
     Is it really impossible for you to give her this last bit of joy? We talk
  of nothing but you and know nothing of how you are getting along,
  what you are doing or even if you’re well. We’re terrified at the
  thought of what might happen to you. Your life is so rich and full, and
  Mama has no one but you. Please try to understand this, Kostik.
     Yesterday Mama said that if you don’t come by the middle of
  August, then she and I will leave here together on foot for Moscow.
  Mama is convinced we’ll make it, somehow. We’ll leave everything
  here – it’s no use to us anymore! – and take nothing but our knapsacks.
  We have little money, but Mama always says the world is full of good
  people and so she fears nothing. We have to leave while it’s still warm,
  well before winter. Maybe we’ll even manage to travel by train part of
  the way, although we hear that they aren’t running anymore.
    My dear Kostik, let us hear from you, somehow, tell us how you are
  and whether we should wait for you. We’ve been living all by
  ourselves in these woods. It’s like being trapped in a lair, and we can’t
  understand why it is we haven’t been murdered yet.

   I felt like someone had taken a razor to my heart. I had to go. But how?
How could I make my way to Ukraine? At the time, Ukraine, the Donbass
and Crimea were occupied by the German army. Kiev was under the control
of a German puppet – Hetman Pavlo Skoropadskyi,1 a polished, long-
legged and stupid officer. Ukrainian newspapers praised him for his
disapproval of décolletage, but other than this they could find nothing
positive to say. Even the Germans made rude jokes about their fake hetman.
   It would take more than a month to acquire an exit visa from the
Commissariat of Internal Affairs to leave Soviet Russia. It was already late
July, and I figured I wouldn’t receive the visa until the end of August. I
knew Mama – no matter what, she and Galya were certain to set out on foot
in mid-August for Moscow, regardless of the risk to their lives. I didn’t
have a day to waste. I had to leave immediately.
   It turned out that to enter Ukraine I had to acquire a visa from the
Ukrainian consul as well. I walked over to the consulate, located off the
courtyard in the back of a large building on Tverskaya Street. A faded
yellow and blue flag hung limply from a pole tied to the railing of a
balcony. Washing had been hung up to dry on the balcony, and the consul’s
baby lay asleep in a pram. An old nanny sat rocking the pram gently with
her foot and singing softly:

       The doves have come to pay a call,
       And they’re carrying figs for one and all,
       Here’s one for Petrik, Petrik, our little boy,
       Our little Colonel, no bigger than a toy.

   It was impossible to get anywhere near the consulate door. Hundreds of
people were sitting and lying about on the dusty ground waiting their turn.
Some had been waiting for over a month, listening to the song about little
Petrik over and over, vainly trying to ingratiate themselves with the consul’s
nanny, and slowly being driven insane by the utter uncertainty of their
situation.
   I realised that I would have to sneak over the border without official
permission. I learned that several Petrograd journalists from the so-called
‘boulevard press’ were planning a trip to Ukraine. Their documents were in
order. A local reporter introduced me to them. With a certain reluctance,
they agreed to take me with them and to help me at the frontier, although, as
their leader, an irritable man who wore a gold pince-nez and grey spats,
said, ‘only within the bounds of reason’. On where exactly these bounds
lay, he was silent. And I knew well myself that if I were caught, no one
would be coming to my defence.
   The plan was to leave in three days. Nothing much happened during
those days, other than that I learned Romanin had arrived in Moscow. I
raced over to the house in the Yakimanka neighbour-hood where he
typically lodged, but the surly woman who opened the door refused to let
me in and said that he stayed there only a few nights a month. I left a letter
for him but never heard from Romanin again. Once more I felt that familiar
bitter sadness of losing another beloved friend. People kept passing through
my life, and no one remained beside me for more than a few years. They
appeared out of nowhere, and then just as quickly vanished, and I knew I
would most likely never see them again. I recalled Lermontov’s words
about ‘the ardour of the soul, squandered in the desert’. They brought me a
bit of comfort.
   Before leaving, I visited my favourite places in Moscow one last time.
From Noevsky Gardens I looked out at the Kremlin. A thunderstorm was
gathering overhead. The domes of the Kremlin cathedrals smouldered with
a dark fire, the wind from the approaching storm tore at the red flags,
lightning sparked and flashed, illuminating an enormous yellow bank of
clouds from deep inside. Suddenly, as though bursting from the crowded
city, thunder rolled across the sky. The clouds opened up, and rain crashed
down into the streets.
   I took shelter in the empty conservatory. A single vase with a flowering
pelargonium had been left behind on one of the shelves. It didn’t look well.
It was stretching all its leaves and flowers towards the air and rain falling
on the other plants that had been taken outside. I took it down off the shelf
and placed it next to the other plants. Battered by the raindrops, it
shuddered and then seemed to come back to life right before my eyes. For
some reason the memory of that plant in the conservatory stayed with me. It
was one of my last impressions of Moscow. I left not knowing what lay
ahead of me, never suspecting, of course, that I would be gone from
Moscow for five long years or that my life would be so much like fiction
that I would find it hard to describe.
   So far in this work I have written only about things that I have seen and
heard myself. For this reason, there are a great many important events I
haven’t mentioned. My intention is to speak as a witness, and I have no
desire to write here in these pages, nor could I if I did, a general history of
these revolutionary years. I began writing this story of my life a long time
ago. I am old now, and still I have only managed to bring my story up to the
time of my early manhood. I don’t know whether I will be able to finish it.
If I were ten years younger, I might write another, more interesting, story of
my life – not about my life as it was but as it could have, and should have,
been had its arrangement depended solely on me and not on a host of
external and often hostile circumstances. It would be a story of what never
happened, of all the things that ruled my heart and soul, of a life that
gathered all the colour, light and excitement of the world into itself. I can
see many chapters of that book as clearly as though I had lived them several
times over.


1Pavlo Skoropadskyi (1873–1945), Ukrainian aristocrat, general in the
Russian Imperial Army, hetman of Ukraine in 1918.

                              OceanofPDF.com
78
The Riga–Orël Goods Wagon



Ever   since childhood I’ve been in love with railways. Maybe it has
something to do with the fact that my father worked on them. Not
surprisingly, my love in those days expressed itself in childish ways.
Whenever our family passed the summer holidays near a railway station, I
spent hours there meeting and seeing off every single train together with the
station guard in his red cap. Even now, every last thing about railways still
has for me the poetry of travel about it, all the way down to the smell of the
coal smoke from the engine.
   I would watch with amazement as the oily, green locomotive, its shiny
pistons churning ever slower, came to a stop near the water tower and
released a great, whistling stream of steam into the sky as though panting
from exertion. I could see before my eyes the engine’s iron breast piercing
fierce winds, the dark of night and dense forests, making its way through
the flowering wilderness of the earth, its whistle echoing far from the
tracks, perhaps all the way to some cottage in the woods where a little boy
like myself was imagining the fiery express racing through the barren night,
and a fox, its paw raised, watched it from a distance and yelped with an
inexpressible pain – or perhaps with joy.
   After the passenger train pulled out, the station sank back into a drowsy
silence. The hot boredom of the station reclaimed its rightful place. Warm
water dripped from the green tub on the platform. Impudent hens strutted
back and forth over the rails. The flowering tobacco plants closed
themselves to wait for evening. The glare from the rails, polished by the
wheels of hundreds of carriages, was blinding. Tethered to the back of a
goods wagon standing on the sidings, a chestnut mare slept. Now and then
the skin on her back twitched to shake off the persistent flies.
   Then a trembling, piercing whistle was heard in the distance. This was a
non-stop goods train. Beyond the station, the tracks curved in a big, wide
arc before disappearing into the pine woods. The trains always exploded out
of the woods unexpectedly, twisting and leaning on the curve. I thought it
was the most beautiful thing I had ever seen. The train flew into the station
at full speed, pouring thick steam, and swept past, a rush of clanking metal,
pounding wheels and tornadoes of dust. It made my head spin. I sometimes
thought the train was about to take flight, to leave the rails and pull all of us
off the platform and up into the air in its wake like so many dried leaves.
The first to go, naturally, would be the station guard in his red cap.
   The goods trains flashed by so fast it hurt my eyes, but sometimes I
managed to read the white letters painted on their sides that indicated the
various rail lines: RO (Riga–Orël), MKV (Moscow– Kiev–Voronezh), SW
(South-West), SPBW (St Petersburg–Warsaw), RU (Ryazan–Urals), PRIV
(Privislinskaya line), MVR (Moscow– Vindavo–Rybinsk), SV (Syzran–
Vyazma), MKhS (Moscow– Kharkov–Sevastopol) and dozens more.
Occasionally, I saw some I didn’t know – USS or SPBS – and then I’d ask
my father and he’d tell me that that was the Ussurskaya line in the Far East
or the St Petersburg–Sestroretsk line, a short stretch of tracks that ran north
from the old capital along the Gulf of Finland. I envied those inanimate
carriages because they never knew where they would be sent next – perhaps
to Vladivostok, and from there to Vyatka, and on to Grodno, Feodosia and
then the little station of Navlya in the heart of the dense Bryansk forest.
   Were it possible, I would have climbed aboard any one of those goods
trains and let it take me away. What lovely days I would have spent on the
sidings where goods trains were always getting held up for a few hours. I
would have stretched out in the warm grass at the foot of a hill, drunk tea
with the station guards at the back of the wagon, bought wild strawberries
from the leggy peasant girls, and swum in the cool water of the little river
nearby where the yellow water lilies blossomed. Once under way, I would
have sat dangling my legs in the open doors of the wagon, the wind,
warmed by the earth, hitting me in the face, as the long, running shadow of
the train raced over the fields and the sun, like a golden shield, sank into the
hazy distance of the Russian plain that rolled on and on, leaving behind its
wine-gold trace on the burnt-out sky.
   I recalled my childhood love of goods trains as I walked up and down the
sidings at Bryansky station searching for wagon number 717 802 of the
Riga–Orël railway line.
   I found my fellow travellers, the Petrograd journalists, already inside.
They had fixed themselves up in comfort and were having tea around a
table made from an upturned crate and telling elegantly bawdy jokes. They
paid no attention to me, barely returned my greeting, and made it quite clear
they wanted nothing to do with me. Why, I wondered, did they ever even
agree to take me with them? I racked my brain in search of an answer. Was
it really just so that if they ran into trouble with the authorities, they could
save their own necks by offering up mine? Their papers were all in order,
but you never knew – the authorities were unpredictable and always looking
for any excuse. In that case, somebody like me, with no travel pass or exit
visa, would be a godsend. I was the perfect foil for them to play the role of
loyal subjects of the Soviet government: ‘Dear Comrades, why are you
picking on us, honest Soviet people, while this shady character without any
documents has wormed his way into our wagon? It’s our duty to report the
man. You should search him.’
   I drove these thoughts away. I was ashamed of them. Five years ago I
never would have thought so poorly of people I didn’t know. Nevertheless, I
couldn’t get over my mistrust of these rather free and easy journalists. I was
especially disgusted by a short man with round, oily eyes. He went by the
name Andrei Borelli, but this was, of course, only a pseudonym he used for
his sensational scoops in the papers. Among themselves, his fellow
journalists called him Dodya. He was constantly hitching up his short khaki
trousers and guffawing. Every time he laughed, he launched a shower of
spit. The spongy, ashen skin of his face looked like rubber. He couldn’t stop
making stupid puns and wisecracks which he delivered with a disgusting
leer. Soviet Russia he called ‘Sovdepia’,1 Moscow was ‘the ancient Red
Navel’ and the Bolsheviks ‘Comrade Bookbinders’. Even the leader of this
corrupt gang – the jaundiced journalist in the grey spats – got fed up with
him at times and snapped: ‘You’ve got a real genius for verbal fornication,
Dodya. Stop your screwing around. We’re all sick and tired of it!’
   ‘If it’s white, you hate it with all your might, if it’s red, you love it until
you’re dead,’ Dodya shot back without stopping to think.
   At this point Grey Spats would threaten to toss Dodya from the train, and
for a minute or two he would stop his twaddle. The night passed without
incident.
   The train was barely dragging itself along. I didn’t bother talking with
my travel companions and was trying to think up an excuse to move to a
different wagon. But it wasn’t possible. The others were full either of
heavily armed Red Army soldiers and sailors from the Baltic fleet or of
cavalry horses. The next day I noticed something quite odd. Strapped to
Dodya’s suitcase was a heavily chipped and dented blue enamel teapot.
What struck me as strange was that at every stop the journalists went to
fetch boiling water with a big tin mug – not the larger teapot – even though
the mug didn’t hold nearly enough water for all of them. The riddle was
unexpectedly solved the following day. The train pulled haltingly into the
station at Bryansk. A soldier from the wagon next to ours stuck his head in
the door.
   ‘Mates, we’re in a bit of trouble,’ he said. ‘Fools that we are, we
somehow managed to lose our teapot along the way. Government issue, no
less! Enough to make you cry! You don’t happen to have a spare, do you?’
   ‘Nope!’ snapped Dodya. ‘We’ve been drinking out of a mug ourselves.’
   ‘You’ve got an enamelled one right there, strapped to your case,’ the
soldier said good-naturedly. ‘Let us have it for the day. I promise to give it
back safely.’
   ‘No, you can’t have this teapot,’ said Grey Spats, his pince-nez flashing
angrily.
   The soldier looked hurt. ‘Why not?’ he asked. ‘Is it made of gold or
something?’
   ‘It leaks, that’s why. Get it? It leaks. It’s useless. Full of holes.’
   A knowing grin spread over the soldier’s face. ‘Aren’t you a strange
group!’ he said, as good-naturedly as before. ‘Can’t imagine why you’d be
dragging such trash around with you. It’d be one thing if you all were poor,
but that’s clearly not it. Here you are putting real sugar in your tea – no
saccharine for you. Oh well, sorry for troubling you.’
   The soldier left. My companions looked at each other, and then one of
them hissed at Dodya: ‘Cretin! Did you have to leave your teapot sticking
out like a sore thumb?’
   I heard some low-voiced grumbling, and then they put a box on top of the
suitcase and laid a coat over that.
   ‘Which wagon?’ someone asked outside. They didn’t sound pleased.
‘This one?’
   ‘Yes, Comrade Commissar. That one – from the Riga–Orël line.’
   Dodya dived for the teapot, grabbed it, placed it on his lap, and then,
straining so hard his eyes began to fill with tears, snapped the tin spout off
and stuck it in his pocket. Just then an elderly, disgruntled commissar pulled
himself up with a groan into the wagon followed by the soldier.
   ‘What’s all this business about a teapot?’ asked the commissar. ‘Where is
it? Let me see.’
   Dodya pulled the broken teapot out from under the box.
   ‘Well, look here – the spout’s gone!’ said the soldier. He gave a whistle.
‘Here a moment ago and now it’s flown off somewhere, just like a little
bird.’
   The commissar looked at the teapot, thought for a moment, and then said
to the soldier: ‘All right then, go and fetch two of the security guards.’
   He turned to the journalists. ‘Your documents.’
   The journalists readily retrieved their documents, but their hands were
shaking. The commissar waited patiently. He looked them over slowly and
then placed them in his jacket pocket.
   ‘Our documents are all in order, Comrade Commissar,’ said Grey Spats.
‘Why are you taking them?’
   ‘I see they’re in order,’ the commissar answered before turning to me
with an expectant look.
   ‘Comrade Commissar, there’s something you should know,’ Grey Spats
spoke up again. ‘This citizen turned up in our wagon in Moscow, even
though we told him to leave. As far as we know, he doesn’t have a travel
permit or an exit visa. He’s the one you should be checking. As loyal Soviet
citizens, we were planning on reporting him to you but simply didn’t have a
chance.’
   ‘And how exactly did you, loyal Soviet citizens that you all are, come to
the conclusion that he doesn’t have a permit or visa? Do you know him?’
   ‘No, not at all.’
   ‘To slander him, you need to know him,’ the commissar instructed. ‘And
we know all about persons who like to hide diamonds in the spouts of
teapots. We usually catch about five of them a week. You need to be
creative in such matters. Creative, you hear me?’ The commissar rapped on
the teapot with his knuckles. ‘And so, my good citizens, follow me. Let’s go
and have a little talk. You can leave your things here for now. Sidorov,
Yershikov,’ he said to two armed Red Army soldiers standing by the wagon,
‘take them to my office. This one’ – here he pointed at me – ‘we can leave
for the time being. And make sure they don’t throw anything out of their
pockets on the way. Understood?’
   ‘Yes, sir!’ they replied. ‘This isn’t the first time, Comrade Commissar.’
   The journalists were led away followed by the commissar. I remained
alone in the wagon. It wasn’t long before the soldiers returned and took the
journalists’ things. I waited. An hour passed. From a nearby agitprop
wagon, a sleepy-looking man, barefoot and shirtless and sporting a huge,
tousled mane of hair and beard, climbed down. He dragged out after him a
sheet of plywood, some brushes and cans of paint, propped the wood up
against the wagon, spat on his hands, grabbed a brush and with a single
stroke drew a fat man in a black top hat. Money poured from the man’s
belly, which had been slit open by a bayonet. The bushy man scratched the
back of his head and then wrote in red down one side of the plywood: ‘The
bourgeois belly, fat with gold, Never expected a strike so bold.’
   The sailors in the neighbouring wagon howled with laughter. He paid
them no attention, sat down on the wagon’s steps and began rolling a thick
makhorka cigarette. Just then a soldier appeared and told me to follow him
to the commissar’s office. This would be my end. I grabbed my suitcase and
off we went. His office was in a coach that stood in a siding overgrown with
dandelions. A shiny new machine-gun stood in the door. The commissar
was sitting and smoking at a table made from a few rough boards. He
looked at me thoughtfully for a long time.
   ‘Let me hear it, every last bit,’ he finally said. ‘Where are you heading
and for what reason? And let me see your documents as well.’
   I realised I had to come clean. I told him about the troubles I had had
trying to get a visa. ‘And as for documents, the most important one I have is
this letter,’ I said, placing Galya’s letter on the table in front of him. ‘I am
afraid I don’t have any others.’
   The commissar frowned and began to slowly read the letter. As he read,
he glanced up at me from time to time. Then he folded the letter, placed it
back in the envelope, and handed it to me.
   ‘The document is clearly authentic,’ he said. ‘Do you have identification
on you?’
   I handed him my only identity card.
   ‘Have a seat,’ he said, and then pulled out a form with an official stamp
and carefully filled it in, looking now and then at my card.
   ‘Here you are!’ he said at last, handing me the form. ‘Here’s your exit
visa!’
   ‘Thank you,’ I said, overcome with emotion. My voice cracked. I
couldn’t believe my luck.
   ‘There, there!’ the commissar said, embarrassed. He stood up and patted
me on the shoulder. ‘Best not to get upset. My compliments to your dear
mother. From Commissar Anokhin, Pavel Zakharovich, tell her. She must
be a remarkable woman. To think of walking all the way to Moscow.’
   He stretched out his hand. I shook it firmly but couldn’t get a word out.
He straightened his belt and his holstered Mauser and said: ‘We’ll have to
liquidate that little runt with the diamonds in the teapot. But we’ve let the
others go. I’ve ordered you to be moved to a different wagon. You can’t be
riding with those types. Well, farewell. And don’t forget to give your
mother my compliments.’
   I walked out in a daze. I could barely hold back my tears. The soldier
leading me noticed. ‘I’d die twice for a commissar like him,’ he said. ‘He’s
a worker from Petrograd, from the Obukhov Factory. Remember his name –
Anokhin, Pavel Zakharovich. You might just meet him again.’
   They took me to a wagon with only two people in it – an elderly singer
and a skinny, talkative boy named Vadik. He was clumsy and simple-
hearted, but kind. Both of them were travelling from Petrograd – the singer
to his only daughter, a doctor in Vinnitsa, and Vadik to his mother in
Odessa. Vadik had left Odessa to spend the winter holidays with his
grandfather in 1917 and got stuck there for a year and a half. He found the
whole thing a marvellous adventure. We travelled without any further
incidents to the station at Zërnovo (Seredyna-Buda), which at the time
marked the frontier between Russia and Ukraine.
   We stopped at a halfway halt on the edge of a forest the night before
reaching Zërnovo. The Bryansk forests stretched off to the north from here,
and nearby were all the wonderful places I had often visited as a child. I
couldn’t sleep. The singer and I hopped down out of our wagon and went
for a walk down a dirt road that took us along the edge of the woods and out
into some dark fields. Summer lightning flashed low over the swaying
grain. We sat on an old elm blown down by a storm at the side of the road.
These massive dead elms, lying alone among the fields and meadows,
always reminded me for some reason of tough old men in homespun tunics,
their grey beards blowing in the wind. The singer said after a silence:
‘Everyone believes in Russia in their own way, and for their own reasons.’
   ‘What are yours?’
  ‘I’m a singer. So you can imagine what mine are.’ He was quiet for a
while and then began to sing, sorrowfully and slowly:

       I walk out alone onto the road,
       Through the fog the stony path shines.
       The night is quiet, the wilderness hearkens to God,
       And overhead star speaks to star.

   I have long believed this poem of Lermontov’s to be the greatest work in
all Russian poetry.2 And despite his saying that he had neither hope for the
future nor regret for the past, it was obvious that Lermontov said all this
precisely because he did regret the past and he did expect life to grant him a
few fleeting, even if illusory, moments of happiness.
   The wind stirred the fields. The agitated corn waved with a scattering
whisper. The lightning flashed brighter, and the thunder groaned drowsily in
the distance. We walked back to the station. I picked a handful of grass as
we made our way through the darkness, and only in the morning did I
notice that it was scented clover, what is for me the most precious of all
Russian flowers.


1A derogatory name for the early Soviet state from the Russian Sovet
Narodnykh Deputatov – the Soviet of People’s Deputies.
2 First stanza of Lermontov’s poem ‘I walk out Alone on to the Road’
(1841), set to music by composer Yelizaveta Shashina (1805–1903) in
1861.

                             OceanofPDF.com
79
The Neutral Zone



Our    train arrived at Zërnovo in the morning. The frontier patrol went
through the train, checking our exit visas. Our wagon and several others
were uncoupled from the train and an old shunting engine dragged us
towards the border, an area called the ‘Neutral Zone’. The doors to our
wagon were kept closed and a few Red Army soldiers with rifles stood
guard.
   At last the train came to a stop, and we got out. The wagons stood in the
middle of a dry field near a track watchman’s hut. The wind had kicked up
the dust. A few peasant carts stood by the barrier. Their drivers – old men
with whips – cried out to us: ‘Who’s heading to the other side, to Ukraine?
Come on over!’
   ‘Is it far?’ I asked an old man with a thin beard.
   ‘Not at all! Three versts from here and you can already see the Germans.
Let’s go!’
   We piled our luggage on the cart and walked along beside it. The rest of
the carts followed us. At the rear I saw the journalists from the Riga–Orël
line. They were walking behind their cart and talking in loud, happy voices.
Dodya wasn’t with them. Grey Spats looked wildly out of place amid the
fields, the swirling dust on the road and the wind-blown nut trees in the
gullies. Once we had gone about a kilometre, he stopped, turned to the
north to face Russia, shook an angry fist at her and then cursed to high
heaven. The driver gave him a frightened look and then shook his head.
   I think I mentioned somewhere that my mother believed in the law of
retribution. No base, inhuman or cruel act, she liked to say, went
unpunished. Sooner or later, retribution would come. I always laughed at
my mother’s superstitions, but that day I myself almost came to share her
belief in the law of retribution.
   The road dropped into a hollow overgrown with brush. Our driver
became nervous and urged on his old nag. We had reached the bottom of the
hollow and started up the other side when out of the scrub stepped a man in
a tall astrakhan hat and dusty violet riding breeches. He held a Mauser in
one hand. Two bandoliers with cartridges formed a cross over his chest.
Several young men in greatcoats, pea-jackets and embroidered Ukrainian
shirts followed close behind. They were armed with sawn-off shotguns and
swords, and some of them had ‘little lemons’ – hand-grenades – dangling
from their belts. The man in the violet breeches raised his Mauser and fired
in the air. The carts stopped immediately.
   ‘Who let you pass?’ he demanded.
   ‘The frontier patrol,’ Grey Spats replied nervously. The man in the violet
breeches was standing right next to the journalists’ cart.
   ‘They must’ve been staring into their own pockets!’ he yelled. ‘But did
they bother to inspect your things?’
   ‘Yes, they did.’
   ‘And your documents?’
   ‘Yes.’
   ‘I say it again, they must’ve been staring into their own pockets! Right
then, have at it, boys!’
   The young men began throwing the luggage onto the ground. Grey Spats
screamed. The man in the violet breeches smashed him in the mouth with
the butt of his Mauser. ‘Want some more?’ he asked. ‘Then shut up, you
bourgeois scum, or I’ll put a hole in that hat of yours.’
   Grey Spats clutched a bloodied handkerchief to his mouth and lay
stretched out in the dirt fumbling for his broken pince-nez. The men started
slitting the leather suitcases open with their swords. They did it neatly and
skilfully – two quick slashes, criss-cross. Apparently, there wasn’t enough
time to break the locks and open the cases. They worked fast and kept
glancing over towards the Soviet frontier. Our driver surreptitiously nudged
his horse and moved his cart forward a few steps. The men were pulling
things out of the suitcases, holding the shirts and sheets up to the light,
taking what struck their fancy and tossing the rest in the dirt.
   ‘They’re distracted,’ the driver whispered to us. ‘Walk up ahead slowly,
up to that bush. There’s a bend there, and we’ll be out of sight. I’ll move on
ahead real quiet like and maybe they won’t notice.’
   We walked on past the bush, and the driver nudged his horse forward a
few paces at a time. He gave his horse a good smack with the whip once he
caught up with us, and as soon as it was over the rise the horse took off at a
gallop. We started to run and after a few minutes we caught up with the cart
where the driver had come to a stop.
   We lit cigarettes and the driver told us that a certain ‘Ataman Kozyuba’
and his gang robbed everyone trying to cross through the Neutral Zone.
They were mostly after gold and jewels. They had to work fast because
even though the Soviet border patrols were not supposed to enter the
Neutral Zone, sometimes they crossed over and attacked the bandits. The
patrols mercilessly shot everyone they captured. We stood there smoking,
all of us glum, even though we had managed to escape the bandits.
   The road wound along a clearing dotted with tree stumps. The sun was
going down. Its reddish rays lit the crowns of the few remaining pines. I
walked along lost in thought. Suddenly, I jumped at the sound of a harsh,
metallic shout: ‘Halt!’
   Two German soldiers in dark greatcoats and steel helmets stood in the
middle of the road. One of them was holding our driver’s mangy horse by
the bridle. The Germans demanded to see my entry permit. I didn’t have
one. One of them, rather stocky, guessed at my plight from the look on my
face. He walked over to me, pointed in the direction of Russia and yelled:
‘Zurück!’
   ‘Give him five tsarist roubles,’ said the driver. ‘That should get rid of the
bastard. Then we can drive on to Mikhailovsky’s farm.’
   I held out my hand with a ten-rouble note.
   ‘No! No!’ the soldier shouted, shaking his head and looking annoyed.
   ‘What are you doing giving him a tenner?’ the driver asked, angrily. ‘I
told you to give him five. That’s the only thing they’ll take. It’s because for
years tsarist five-rouble notes were printed in Germany.’
   I gave the soldier the five roubles. He put a finger to his helmet and
waved at us to get moving. ‘Fa-ahr!’ he shouted.
   We went on. I turned round. The Germans, their legs spread wide and
their sturdy boots planted in the sandy road, were laughing and smoking.
The sun glinted off their helmets. I felt a lump in my throat. I was overcome
with the sensation that Russia was no more, everything was lost and there
was nothing left to live for.
   The singer seemed to guess what I was thinking and said: ‘Dear God,
what’s become of Russia? It’s like some horrible dream.’
   Vadik also stopped and looked at the Germans, his lips began to quiver
and he broke down sobbing like a little child.
   ‘Never mind, lad,’ the driver muttered. ‘Someday, probably not soon, but
someday, we’ll pay them back.’ He shook the reins, and the cart creaked on
through the deep red sand marked by the Germans’ steel-shod boots. To the
north, where we had left Russia behind, evening’s pink haze was thickening
over the clearing. Purple clover grew in clumps along the roadside. For
some reason, this made me feel better. We’ll have to see who wins, I told
myself. We’ll just have to see.

                            OceanofPDF.com
80
Our Rag-Tag Hetman



I stayed in Kopan until late autumn, when I moved to Kiev to find work
and lodgings in preparation for bringing Mama and Galya to live with me.
It took a while. Eventually, I landed a job as a proofreader for the city’s one
fairly respectable newspaper, Kievan Thought. The paper had known better
days. Korolenko had written for it, as had Lunacharsky and other
progressive figures. Even under the Germans and the Hetman, Kievan
Thought tried to maintain an independent line, though not always
successfully. The authorities fined it constantly and several times threatened
to close it down.
   I rented two small rooms from an overly sensitive Swiss spinster, Amalia
Knoster, in a modest house near St Vladimir’s Cathedral. I was not able to
bring Mama and Galya to Kiev, however, for at that moment the city was
besieged by Petlyura’s forces.1 My windows looked out onto the Botanical
Gardens. I awoke one morning to the sound of cannon fire which
ceaselessly swept the entire perimeter of the city. I got up, lit the stove,
looked out at the gardens where the gunfire was knocking the hoar-frost off
the trees, and then went back to bed to read and think. The icy winter
morning, the crackle of the burning logs in the stove, the booming of the
guns – all this induced in me an unusual and precarious but nevertheless
undeniable peace of mind. My head felt clear. I washed in the icy water
from the tap. For some reason the smell of coffee coming from Frau
Knoster’s room brought back memories of Christmas Eve.
   I began to write a great deal at the time. Strange as it may seem, the siege
helped. The city was held in a tight ring, and so were my thoughts. The
realisation that Kiev was cut off from the world, that no one could get out,
that the siege was likely to last a long time, and that there was nothing to do
now but wait, made life somehow easier and more carefree. Even Frau
Knoster became accustomed to the cannonade as a regular feature of daily
life. When it occasionally stopped, she grew fidgety and nervous. Silence
foretold something new and unexpected and, hence, dangerous. But soon
the low thunder ringing the city started up again, and everyone relaxed. You
could read again, or think, or work and return to the familiar cycle of
normal life: of waking up, work, starvation (or, more accurately, half-
starvation) and finally blissful sleep.
   I was Amalia’s sole lodger. She let rooms only to single men, although
without any devious intentions. It was simply that she couldn’t stand most
women. She quietly fell in love with every one of her lodgers, although she
expressed this through nothing more than extra care and concern or sudden,
deep blushes. These would flood her long sallow face at the uttering of any
word that might possibly be construed as a subtle reference to the
dangerous realm of love and marriage. She loved to talk about all her
former lodgers and was sincerely disappointed when they became engaged,
as if by conspiracy, to some cruel and greedy woman and moved out.
Amalia had been a governess to rich Kiev families, saved some money and
rented her present flat. She earned a living by letting rooms and sewing.
   Despite her former profession as a governess, there was nothing stiff or
prim about Amalia. She was simply a kind, boring and lonely woman.
Amalia hated the Germans occupying Kiev and considered them boors. She
treated me with an air of timid sympathy, apparently because I tended to
read and write at night. She considered me a writer and from time to time
even got up the courage to talk to me about literature and her favourite
writer, Spielhagen. She cleaned my room herself, and sometimes I would
come back to find a sprig of dried flowers or a picture postcard of a brilliant
dahlia left between the pages of one of my books. But there was never
anything intrusive about these little acts of kindness, and nothing ever
interfered with our friendship.
   Her friends – elderly German and Swiss governesses in gaiters and capes
with satin ribbons, reticules in their hands – came to visit on feast days.
Amalia put out a pile of napkins embroidered with kittens, puppies, pansies
and forget-me-nots, spread these treasures on the table and served her
famous Basel coffee (her family originally came from there). The
governesses ate and drank daintily and carried on a conversation that
consisted entirely of exclamations of astonishment or horror. Only one man
was admitted to this select company – our house superintendent, a clerk for
the South-West Railway. He had a most luxurious name: Pan Sebastian
Kturenda-Tsikavsky.
   He was a cocky little man with a crew-cut, the dyed moustache of a pimp
and insolent little button eyes. He dressed in a navy-blue jacket with brown
stripes cut for a much smaller man and had sewn to his breast pocket a strip
of purple silk that was meant to act as a symbolic replacement for a missing
and presumably fashionable handkerchief. He was fond of bow-ties and the
pink celluloid collars that were then referred to as ‘bachelor’s luck’. There
was no way to wash them and so his collars were always dirty. The only
way to get the dirt out was to rub them with an ordinary schoolboy’s rubber.
Pan Kturenda gave off a complex aroma of hair dye, stale tobacco and
hooch, which he distilled himself in his own dimly lit room. Kturenda was a
bachelor and lived with his mother, a timid old woman who was afraid of
her son and especially of his learning. Pan Kturenda loved to impress the
lodgers with it as well, always in the most florid language.
   ‘I have the privilege of informing you’, he liked to say mysteriously, ‘that
Weininger’s Sex and Character is the formulation of the sexual question in
its most articulate of expressions.’ Pan Kturenda never broached the subject
of sex in his conversations with Frau Amalia, but he made the governesses
quiver with his accounts of the divine origins of ‘the Most Noble Pan
Hetman Skoropadskyi’. I have seen many fools in my life, but nothing to
compare with the likes of this idiot.
   Life in Kiev at the time reminded one of a feast in a time of plague.2
Many coffee houses and restaurants had sprung up, although none of them
had enough sweets and food for even a dozen or so patrons. Still, they made
an impression of shabby wealth. The population had nearly doubled in size
from the influx of a great many Muscovites and Petrograders.
Artsybashev’s Jealousy3 and Viennese operettas played in the theatres.
German uhlans with lances and red and black pennants patrolled the streets.
The newspapers carried little news about events in Soviet Russia. It was a
touchy subject. The editors decided it was best to ignore such matters.
There was no harm in letting readers think that life there was just fine.
   Ox-eyed Kievan beauties and the Hetman’s officers roller-skated arm in
arm on the city’s rinks. Gambling dens and brothels opened left and right.
At the Bessarabsky Market, cocaine was sold openly and passers-by were
accosted by prepubescent prostitutes. No one had any idea what was
happening at the local factories and in the workers’ suburbs. The Germans
didn’t feel secure, especially after the murder of General Eichhorn. One got
the impression Kiev was determined to enjoy itself during the blockade. As
for Ukraine, it was as though it didn’t even exist. Nothing beyond the ring
of Petlyura’s men seemed real.
   Some evenings I walked over to an arts club on Nikolaevskaya Street.
Poets, singers and dancers who had fled from the north performed on a
restaurant stage. Loud drunks liked to interrupt the long-winded poetry
readings. It was hot and stuffy inside, even in winter, and so the windows
were often opened a crack. Together with the frosty air, snow would blow
into the brightly lit room, land and immediately melt. With the windows
ajar, the nightly sound of the guns became more apparent.
   One evening Vertinsky sang.4 I had never heard him perform before. I
still remembered him as a schoolboy who wrote exquisite verses. It was
snowing unusually hard that evening, and the flakes twirled round and
round in the air, drifting all the way to the piano where they caught the
multi-coloured lights of the chandelier. Petlyura’s guns were getting closer
now. Their thundering made the glasses on the tables ring. The troubling
sound of the glassware seemed to be sending us a warning signal, but
everyone carried on smoking, arguing, making toasts and laughing. A
young woman in a black evening dress with narrow eyes that reminded me
somehow of Egypt had the most infectious laugh of all that night.
Snowflakes were landing on her exposed back, and with each one she
shivered and quickly turned round as if she wanted to see it melt, but by
then it was already too late.
   Vertinsky came out onto the stage in a black tail-coat. He was tall, thin
and terribly pale. The room fell silent. The waiters stopped serving and
formed a line at the back. Vertinsky twisted his long slender fingers
together, held them out in front of him in an air of great suffering, and
started to sing. He sang of the Cadets recently killed outside Kiev in the
village of Borshchagovka, of the youths sent to a certain death against a
dangerous gang. ‘I don’t know, who wanted this or why? What merciless
hand sent these boys off to die?’
   He sang of the Cadets’ funeral. Vertinsky ended with the words:

       Mourners huddled silently, shivering in their coats,
       A woman, her frenzied face hidden behind a hand,
       Bent down and kissed the cold blue lips of a corpse
       And flung at the priest her wedding band.

    He was singing of an actual incident that had happened at the Cadets’
funeral. The audience applauded. Vertinsky bowed. A drunken officer
seated at a table in the back blurted out: ‘Sing “God Save the Tsar”!’
    The room erupted. A wizened old man who looked like a school-teacher
in a pince-nez and a coat shiny with age rushed at the officer. His pointy
little beard shaking with rage, the man began pounding the marble-topped
table with his bony fists and showering the officer with spittle as he
screamed: ‘Riff-raff ! Vermin! You and all the other officers! How dare you
insult the people of Free Russia! Why aren’t you at the front fighting the
Bolsheviks? Just another paper tiger!’
    Everyone jumped up. The old man threw himself at the officer, but some
patrons pulled him away. Red in the face, the officer slowly stood up,
kicked away his chair and grabbed a bottle by the neck. The waiters rushed
over to him. The woman in the black dress screamed and covered her face
with her hands. Vertinsky banged a loud chord on the piano and raised a
hand. The noise stopped. ‘Ladies and Gentlemen!’ he said in a clear and
contemptuous voice, ‘This is just too tiresome!’ With that, he turned and
slowly walked off the stage.
    The man in the pince-nez had been served a glass of water. As if nothing
had happened, the officer sat back down and said to no one in particular:
‘I’ve beaten Yids all my life and I’ll go on beating Yids until the day I die.
I’ll show you what officers’ scum is, Master Movshenzon from Gomel-
Gomel.’
    The room erupted once more. A patrol of the Hetman’s Cossack guards
with blue and yellow armbands appeared in the restaurant. I left. As I
walked, I cursed under my breath. Our country was over-flowing with all
kinds of riff-raff – be they in officers’ epaulettes, pink celluloid collars or
heavy German helmets – but I couldn’t pretend to have done anything about
it. I spent my days writing, that was it. I had been taken prisoner by my
imaginary world and was helpless to escape it.
    My writings to this point were merely picturesque exercises and useless
sketches. They were full of wild imagination, but nothing more. I could
spend hours crafting different descriptions of sunshine – the way it flashed
on broken glass, or on a ship’s brass ladder, on windowpanes, a drinking
glass, dew, the mother-of-pearl lining of a shell, a human eye. For me, they
came together to form a series of unexpected images. The proper use of
imagination demands sharpness, definition, which I rarely achieved. Most
of my sketches were blurry. At that time, I wanted to forget real life and so I
never did struggle to give my writings the precision of reality.
   Eventually, I created my own literary school out of these descriptive
sketches. But after reading them over, one after another, I quickly
discovered how mawkish and boring they were. It came as a shock. Good
prose requires vigour and austerity, and I had been churning out candy
floss, Turkish delight and bonbons. They were sticky, these verbal sweets of
mine. It was hard to wash them off. I scrubbed and scrubbed, but not always
successfully. Traces of this misty, florid prose remained. Thankfully, this
phase didn’t last long, and I tore up nearly everything I had written. Yet
even now, I have to be on guard against my predilection for pretty words.
   And then, all of a sudden, my writing and my doubts were interrupted in
a most unexpected manner. Petlyura was drawing the noose tighter and
tighter around Kiev. In response, Hetman Skoropadskyi issued a decree
calling up all men without exception between the ages of eighteen and
thirty-five. The house superintendents were responsible for making sure
every male obeyed, otherwise they would be considered to have been
‘hiding’ the men and would be shot immediately. The decree was posted
throughout the city. I read it matter-of-factly. I considered myself a citizen
of the Russian Federative Republic and so not subject to any of the
Hetman’s decrees, which, to be honest, I had no desire to follow.
   Late one winter evening I was returning home along Bibikovsky
Boulevard from the printers. A cold wind was blowing. The poplars made a
plaintive murmur. A woman muffled in a warm shawl was standing by the
gate to my house. She hurried up to me and took my hand. I drew back.
   ‘Quiet!’ she said. I recognised Amalia’s voice, breathless with emotion.
‘Follow me.’
   We walked off in the direction of St Vladimir’s Cathedral. Hulking
buttresses shored up its massive walls. We stopped behind one of the walls
to get out of the wind, and even though we were all alone, Amalia spoke in
a hurried whisper.
   ‘Thank God you’ve been out all day. He’s been sitting in the front hall
since ten o’clock this morning. He hasn’t moved once. It’s terrible!’
   ‘Who?’
   ‘Pan Kturenda. He’s lying in wait for you.’
   ‘Why?’
   ‘Oh Lord!’ she cried, raising her hands, hidden in a small muff, to her
chest. ‘You’ve got to run! I beg you! Don’t go back to your room. I’ll give
you the address of a friend – one of the kindest old women left on earth.
I’ve written her a letter. Go to her. It’s far from here, in Glubochitsa, but
you’ll be safer there. She lives all alone in a small house and can hide you.
I’ll bring you food every day until the danger passes.’
   ‘What’s happened?’ I asked. ‘I don’t understand.’
   ‘Haven’t you read the Hetman’s decree?’
   ‘Yes, I’ve read it.’
   ‘Kturenda has come to turn you in. To hand you over to the army.’
   Only now did I understand.
   ‘He’s crying,’ Amalia said coldly. ‘He’s soaked in tears and keeps saying
that if you run off he’ll be shot like a common bandit tomorrow morning at
ten.’ She pulled a letter from her muff and placed it in the pocket of my
coat. ‘Go!’
   ‘Thank you, Amalia Karlovna! I’m in no danger. I’m a citizen of the
Russian Federation. I don’t give a damn about the Hetman’s decrees.’
   ‘Oh Lord, that’s wonderful,’ she said, ignoring my crude language. She
pressed the muff to her chest and laughed. ‘I didn’t know that. So that
means they’ll leave him alone as well.’
   ‘Nothing’s going to happen. I’ll go to the recruiting office with him
tomorrow and we’ll settle the matter right then and there.’
   ‘Well, all right then,’ she said, now completely reassured. ‘Let’s go
home. I’ll go in first, and you follow me a few minutes later so he doesn’t
suspect anything. Oh, I’m so tired!’
   For the first time since we had met, I took her by the arm. I could feel her
shaking as we walked. She waited a minute or two on the steps before
entering her room. Pan Kturenda was sitting in the front hall. He hurled
himself at me, grabbed my arms with his bony claws and muttered in a
quivering voice: ‘For the love of Christ, don’t kill me! I’ve been waiting
here for you the whole day. Have pity, if not for me, then at least for my
poor mama!’
   I told him that tomorrow the two of us would visit the recruiting office
and since I was a Russian citizen they would of course let me go. Pan
Kturenda gave a sob, dropped to his knees and tried to kiss my hand. I
snatched it away. Amalia stood in the doorway watching Kturenda with a
piercing stare. I had never seen this look in her eyes before. All of a sudden
it hit me that if I had followed Amalia’s advice, then this wretched little
man might indeed have been shot. I couldn’t help but marvel at the cool
ruthlessness of this extraordinarily sensitive woman.
   Pan Kturenda went off, calling down blessings on my head and insisting
that, of course, I would be exempt because Pan Hetman had no interest in
recruiting Reds from Moscow into his army.
   After I had washed under the tap in the kitchen, Amalia stopped me in
the hall on the way to my room. ‘Not a word!’ she whispered mysteriously,
taking me by the hand and tiptoeing across the small sitting room and into
the dark front hall. She stopped, pointed at a door, and gently pushed down
on my shoulders as a way of telling me to peep through the keyhole. I
looked. There sat Pan Kturenda, yawning silently, his mouth covered by a
hand, on an egg-crate at the top of the stairs. Clearly, he had not believed
me and was making sure I didn’t sneak off in the middle of the night.
   ‘He’s an animal!’ whispered Amalia when we were back in the sitting
room. ‘And to think I used to have him in my house. I hate him so now that
the mere sight of him gives me a headache. I’ve left some breakfast for you
in the kitchen cupboard.’
   At exactly eight o’clock the following morning, Pan Kturenda rang the
bell at my door. I opened it. His red eyes were full of tears. The wings of his
bow-tie had drooped. He looked pathetic. We walked over to the
recruitment office in the Galitsky Market. Pan Kturenda, complaining that
he felt dizzy, held me tightly by the arm. It was obvious he was afraid I
might try to escape down some dark side street. At the office, we had to
stand in a queue. House superintendents, fat ledgers under their arms, were
fussing around the recruits. They looked embarrassed and ingratiating and
kept offering, or, more accurately, forcing, cigarettes on their charges,
nodding foolishly at everything the young men said, and making sure not to
leave their side for moment.
   One of the Hetman’s officers in yellow and blue epaulettes sat behind a
desk at the far end of a room that smelled of coffee. His foot bounced up
and down nervously under the desk. Ahead of me was a sickly, unshaven
youth in spectacles. He waited quietly, his eyes directed at the floor. When
his turn came and the officer asked his profession, he said: ‘Accountant.’
   ‘A count?’ the officer asked, leaning back in his chair and beaming with
pleasure at the young man. ‘That’s a rare bird! I’ve had lots of nobles and
even a few barons, but so far no counts.’
   ‘Not a count, an accountant.’
   ‘Shut up!’ The officer said matter-of-factly. ‘We’re all counts. And we
know all about you counts and accountants. Any more nonsense out of you
and you’ll end up in the housekeeping unit.’
   The young man just shrugged his shoulders.
   ‘Next!’
   I was next. I showed the officer my documents and said firmly that as a
citizen of the Russian Soviet Federation I could not be called up into the
Hetman’s army.
   ‘What a surprise!’ said the officer, making a face and raising his
eyebrows. ‘Your words simply delight me. Had I known you planned to
grace us with your presence, I would have called for the regimental band.’
   ‘Your jokes really aren’t called for.’
   ‘Oh, really? And what is called for? Maybe this?’ he asked angrily and
stood up. He made an obscene gesture with his hand and shoved it in my
face. ‘Do you think I give a fig for your Soviet-Jewish citizenship? I
couldn’t give a damn about it or you.’
   ‘You can’t talk to me like this!’ I said, trying to stay calm.
   ‘Everybody’s always telling me what I can and can’t do.’ The officer
sighed sadly and sat back down. ‘That’s enough now! Out of my respect for
your so-called citizenship, I’m putting you down for the Cossack Infantry
Regiment – Pan Hetman’s very own life guards. You should thank God for
that. Your documents will remain with me. Next!’
   During this conversation, Pan Kturenda disappeared. We recruits were
marched off under guard to the barracks in Demievka. The whole farce,
highlighted by the presence of so many bayonets, was so ludicrous and
unbelievable that the seriousness of it didn’t hit me until we reached the
cold barracks. I sat down on a dusty window-sill, lit a cigarette and thought
things over. I was prepared to face any danger or hardship, but not as a
soldier in the Hetman’s army. I decided to look around for an opportunity to
escape. The farce quickly turned bloody. That first night sentries shot and
killed two young men from the workers’ suburb of Predmostnaya for
walking out of the gate and not stopping fast enough when ordered.
   The shelling was growing louder. This calmed those of us who had not
yet lost the ability to feel anything. It signalled some sort of change, and
soon, although whether good or bad no one could say. Not that it mattered.
The Ukrainian saying ‘It may be worse, but at least it’s different’ was on
everybody’s lips in Kiev.
   Most of the recruits were so-called motor boys. That’s what the hooligans
and thieves from Solomenka and Shuliavka – the worst slums on the
outskirts of Kiev – were called. They were wild, desperate youths. They
were happy to join the Hetman’s army. It was clear that its final days were
approaching, and the motor boys knew better than anyone that in the
coming chaos they would be able to hold onto their weapons and then rob
and loot at will and generally raise hell. And so in the meantime the motor
boys tried not to arouse the suspicions of the authorities and, as best they
could, behave as model soldiers of the Hetman’s army. It boasted a
grandiloquent title: ‘The Cossack Infantry Regiment of His Most Noble and
Radiant Highness Pan Pavlo Skoropadskyi’. I was assigned to a regiment
under the command of a former Russian airman. We addressed him as ‘Pan
Sotnik’, an old Cossack military term roughly comparable to a captain. He
didn’t know a word of Ukrainian, other than a few simple commands, and
even these he wasn’t too sure of. He always had to stop and think for a few
moments before saying ‘right’ or ‘left’, trying to remember which was
which. He was openly contemptuous of the Hetman’s army. Sometimes,
looking at us, he would shake his head with disgust and say: ‘Just look at
you, the Shah of Lilliput’s army! Nothing but a band of riff-raff and
ninnies!’
   He spent a few days pretending to teach us how to march, fire our rifles
and handle grenades. Then they dressed us in tobacco-coloured greatcoats,
caps with the Ukrainian seal, old boots and puttees and got us to parade up
and down Kreshchatik Street. They informed us that tomorrow we were
being sent to the front against Petlyura’s men. Together with a few other
units, we marched down Kreshchatik past the city Duma, where as a child I
had come under fire. Even now, many years later, the gilded figure of the
arch-strategist St Michael still balanced on one foot atop the spire.
   In front of the Duma, the Hetman, in a white Circassian coat and a
crumpled little Cossack hat, sat astride an English bay, a riding crop in his
hand. Arranged behind the Hetman, as still as statues on their dark,
gunmetal steeds, were several German generals. They wore helmets with
gilded spikes and almost every single one of them had a glinting monocle
screwed in place. Thin crowds of curious bystanders had gathered on the
pavement. The units marched past, saluting the Hetman with lacklustre
cheers of ‘Hurrah!’ He merely raised his crop to his hat and gave his horse a
quick tug on the reins.
  Our unit had prepared a little surprise for the Hetman. As soon as we
drew even with him, we broke into a jaunty tune:

       Our pride, our joy! Such a fine man!
       That’s our rag-tag Pan Hetman!
       To the future, there’s just one key,
       No one else but – Pavlo Skoropadskyi!

   The motor boys sang with exceptional bravura, adding whistles and a
rollicking ‘Ekh!’ at the beginning of each stanza. The boys were angry that
we were being sent off to the front so soon and had got a bit out of hand.
   Skoropadskyi didn’t bat an eyelid. As calm as ever, he raised his crop to
his hat, grinned as though he had heard a clever joke and turned to share the
fun with the German generals behind him. An ironic flash of their monocles
was the only sign that the generals had got the gist of the song. The crowd
on the pavement erupted with laughter.
   They woke us up when it was still dark. The unwished-for dawn was
nothing more than a pale streak in the east. The sullen morning, the stench
of paraffin in the barracks, the weak tea that smelled oddly of salted
herring, the quiet despair that filled Pan Sotnik’s faded eyes, the cold, wet
boots we could scarcely pull on – all this amounted to such complete and
senseless misery, to such enormous, devastating unease, that I decided I had
to escape from the Cossack Infantry Regiment of His Most Noble and
Radiant Highness Pan Hetman that very day.
   At roll call we discovered that twelve men had already deserted. Pan
Sotnik shrugged his shoulders and said: ‘To hell with all of you! Fall in!’
   We more or less managed to form a line.
   ‘Forward, march!’ commanded Pan Sotnik. Shivering, we exited the
damp and dubious warmth of the barracks into the biting air of the early
winter morning.
   ‘Where exactly is the front?’ a sleepy voice asked with a note of
confusion from the rear. ‘Do we really plan to march the whole way?’
   ‘Ever heard of Madame Tsimkovich’s brothel, over in Priorka? Well,
that’s where the front is. It’s the supreme commander’s HQ.’
   ‘Would you please shut up,’ Pan Sotnik begged. ‘Honest to God, it’s
disgusting to listen to you. And besides, you’re not supposed to talk while
marching.’
   ‘We know what we’re supposed to do and what not.’
   Pan Sotnik just sighed and moved a few paces away from the men. The
truth was, the motor boys frightened him.
   ‘They sold out Ukraine for a bottle of schnapps,’ said a deep, angry
voice. ‘And now we’re the ones forced to wade through this pile of snow
and horseshit. It’s a bloody disgrace!’
   ‘To hell with the lot of ’em, I say!’
   ‘Who’s “them”?’
   ‘Them, every last one – Petlyura, and that bastard Hetman and all the
rest. All of ’em! Just leave the people in peace.’
   ‘Hey, Pan Sotnik, what’s the matter with you? Don’t be shy, say
something! Tell us, just where is the front?’
   ‘Just beyond Priorka,’ he replied hesitantly. ‘Near the Voditsa Woods.’
   ‘Whoa, whoa, whoa, now you tell us! That’s a good ten versts from here.’
   ‘Don’t worry,’ said Pan Sotnik, ‘we’re going to get a ride.’
   The soldiers tittered. ‘On what?’
   ‘You’ll see.’
   ‘The tsar’s landau. It’s the least they could do for heroes like us.’
   I still don’t know what dull apathy kept us marching on, even though all
of us, Pan Sotnik included, understood that there was no good reason for
going to the front and that we could just as easily and without any fear of
consequences turn round and head home. But we kept on nevertheless,
down to Podol and into Kontraktovaya Square. There, a normal, everyday
morning had begun – little boys in their grey overcoats were on the way to
school, the bells of the Bratsky Bogoyavlensky Monastery summoned the
worship-pers, peasant women in boots drove mangy cows to market,
barbers opened their filthy shops, and house porters swept the dirty, slushy
snow off the pavement. Two old open-decked trams stood on the square.
   ‘All aboard!’ shouted Pan Sotnik, having suddenly come to life.
   In complete shock, the regiment stopped dead in its tracks.
   ‘You heard me – all aboard!’ he was angry now. ‘I told you transport had
been arranged. These are military trams.’
   The Cossacks began talking happily among themselves.
   ‘Now, this is what I call a civilised war!’
   ‘One of Father Gervasy’s miracles! Heading off to the front on a tram.’
   ‘Get in, boys, you’re holding us up!’
   We quickly climbed in, and the jingling trams trundled off down the
cobbled streets of Podol and through dreary Priorka to the Voditsa Woods.
Just beyond Priorka the trams came to a stop. We got out and followed Pan
Sotnik, straggling through alleys lined with crooked hovels and snow-
bound open spaces dotted here and there with mounds of stinking manure.
Up ahead loomed a dark, ancient park. This was the famous park called
‘Cheer Up’, which I had known so well since my childhood.
   On a snow-covered slope near the edge of the park, a network of trenches
had been dug, complete with communications, bunkers and foxholes. The
Cossacks were unexpectedly pleased with the fox-holes, which provided
excellent cover. Pan Sotnik took a bunker for himself, and the motor boys
quickly occupied two foxholes. Within minutes they had set up trestle
boards and were playing cards.
   I stood watch at the observation post. Before me lay a large field and
beyond that the pine forest of the Voditsa Woods, now green and thawing
out in the warm wind. Petlyura’s men took lazy pot-shots at us from there.
The bullets whizzed quietly and harmlessly over our heads, now and then
smacking into the parapets. Pan Sotnik had forbidden us from showing our
heads or returning fire. To the right, a leaden sky hung over the Dnieper,
and a dirt track, reddish-brown from manure, led into a wood. To the left,
from the direction of Svyatoshino, came the sound of artillery fire. However
hard I stared into the woods, I never once saw one of Petlyura’s men. If
only a bush had stirred, but I didn’t even see so much as that. It was boring,
standing there. I lit a cigarette. I had recently managed to get hold of three
packets of Odessan Salve cigarettes and was quite proud of myself. They
were fat, strong and aromatic.
   I smoked and, with nothing better to do, thought back over the past few
years of my life. They had been full of adventure. I thought it was high time
I got serious and dedicated myself to becoming a writer. I was twenty-six,
but still hadn’t written anything worthwhile – nothing but some vague
drafts, sketches and studies. I had to set a goal, make a plan, stop drifting.
   I thought I saw something move off to my right, just beyond the dirt
track. There was an old cemetery over there. On a grave mound a cross
stood leaning to one side. All of a sudden, it seemed strangely familiar
somehow–the sullen day and the cross, the thaw in the air and the jackdaws
screeching behind me in the dark park, the track covered with manure and
rotting straw. The sensation was so powerful I let out a moan. It was exactly
three years ago, on a day just like this on a mound just like the one I saw
before me, that we had buried Lëlya. Three years that seemed like three
decades. Still the same Germans, the same ice and slush, although by now
perhaps no trace of her grave was left. Not for a moment could I imagine
her bones lying in the ground. I did not believe it possible. It seemed to me
that she would lie forever just as she had been when we laid her body in
that wooden coffin – pale and indescribably beautiful, peaceful and young,
her eyes closed and her lashes casting sad shadows on her cheeks.
   There was no one I could ever tell this to, not even Mama. I was
condemned to carry this burning pain in my heart. I felt this pain every day
and still do, even though I speak of it rarely. Maybe it’s pointless to bring it
up. Can a writer ever be certain that stony critics or churlish readers won’t
treat such painful confessions with derisive condescension? Can a writer
ever be certain that a confession of one’s grief will not be used by others to
inflict even more pain?
   Still thinking about Lëlya, I lit another cigarette and then, desperate to
discharge my sudden anxiety somehow, I pulled the trigger of my rifle. A
shot rang out and was answered immediately by a ragged volley from the
cemetery, where Petlyura’s men had apparently been hiding. My shot must
have startled them. Pan Sotnik leapt from his bunker. We opened fire on the
cemetery. Our bullets were knocking splinters off the crosses and then we
saw some soldiers break cover and run for the woods. The motor boys fired
at them as they took flight, whistling and hounding them with curses. In the
end, we had repulsed their planned attack.
   I was relieved from my post by a bushy-haired student in thick glasses,
probably the son of a priest. I went down into a foxhole. A small smoky
paraffin lamp gave a bit of light. I pulled some bread and a piece of stale
smoked sausage out of my knapsack and started to eat. The duty orderly
came over, a little man with bright eyes, white scars all over his face and a
tattoo on his hand in the shape of a woman’s pursed pair of lips. When he
opened his palm, the lips puckered as though ready for a kiss. The tattoo
made him enormously popular with the motor boys. He poured me a mug of
hot tea, handed me three sugar cubes and patted me on the back, saying:
‘Tea by Vysotsky, sugar by Brodsky and Russia – by Trotsky.5 Right, aren’t
I?’
    Not waiting for an answer, he left and walked over to the gamblers at the
trestle board. Cursing and clowning, he sat down and joined in the game.
The guns in the direction of Svyatoshino boomed louder and louder. After
every explosion, the lamp poured out ever more smoke. Warm and tired, I
fell asleep leaning against the wall of the foxhole. I awoke in the middle of
the night to the muffled sounds of swearing and commotion. The gamblers
were fighting. They were holding the orderly face down on the trestle board
and calmly, methodically punching him in the head. He wasn’t resisting. No
doubt he knew he had earned a beating. Three men were needed for a new
duty shift in the trench. The motor boys let the orderly go, and three of us –
the orderly, a tall man in a cavalry greatcoat and myself – made our way
over to the trench.
    It was warmer now, and the melting snow sounded like mice scurrying
around us. The orderly kept up a stream of cursing until the man in the
cavalry coat hissed at him angrily: ‘Shut your trap or I’ll carve you up into
little pieces. Got it?’
    The orderly spat, moved a bit closer to me, sat back on his haunches,
drew a deep breath and said: ‘You won’t carve me up, chum, I’ve already
done it myself. Made a proper picture of my mug. I’ve got scars on top of
my scars. Haven’t you noticed?’
    ‘Yes, I noticed,’ I said. I had no interest in talking to this ridiculous man.
    ‘They aren’t really scars at all,’ he said with unexpected sadness.
‘They’re a strange tale of love written on my hide. That’s how you have to
read them.’
    He laughed in a curious way, almost as if he were choking. ‘I worked
some time ago on a Volga steamer that belonged to the Caucasus-Mercury
Company. I was a waiter in the restaurant. Well, on one of our trips, a girl
who was about to finish gymnasium boarded the boat at Kostroma on her
way downriver to Simbirsk. I’d had lots of women by then – shipboard
girlfriends mostly. I had an easy way with them. Some men weep, beat their
heads against the wall if a woman falls out of love with them. Not me. I
took what I wanted and got more than my share. And if some woman had
had enough, so what – good riddance, I’d say! The greedy ones always
seemed to fall for me. All the women I knew were greedy – either for love
or for money. Most of them were waitresses or kitchen maids, young ones
. . . Well . . . so this schoolgirl comes aboard and makes her way to the
restaurant for some dinner. All on her little lonesome. Pale, beautiful, and
by the look of her this was all new to her and made her feel a bit shy. Her
plaits were of pure gold, thick and luxurious, pulled back around the nape
of her neck. I brushed them with a hand while waiting on her. Sent a shiver
right through me – those plaits seemed somehow so cold and springy. I
begged her pardon, of course, but she just frowned, glanced at me, said not
to worry and then tidied her hair. A proud girl, you could see it.
   ‘Well, I thought, I’ve had it this time! What really knocked me over was
some sort of purity about her, like an apple tree in blossom, you know,
sweet-smelling all over. I was hooked. Feelings took hold of my body, I
even started moaning. The thought of her getting off at Simbirsk and me
stuck on the boat with my damned broken heart was enough to make me
want to bash my head against the wall and howl with misery. But I held
myself together. I had to be patient – Simbirsk was still two full days away.
I made sure to serve her only the best of everything. I even promised the
cook a bottle of vodka if he’d add a little extra garnish to her plates. She
was young, inexperienced, and didn’t notice a thing. She was a young lady,
just a girl, to be honest. I tried talking to her, even though this was strictly
forbidden. Quick, silent service, and no talking to the fine paying customers
– those were our orders. Don’t go sticking your dirty mug in where it
doesn’t belong, heaven forbid! You’re a servant, so act like one: “Yes, sir!”
“Right away, sir!” “May I take your order, sir?” “Thank you very much,
sir.” That was for if they tipped you.
   ‘I was having trouble finding a chance to talk to her. The other waiter,
Nikodim, was always hovering around. Then I had a bit of luck – Nikodim
went off to the kitchen. I asked her immediately: “Miss, where might you
be going?” She raised her eyes – they were dark and grey, her lashes as
velvety as the night – and said: “Simbirsk. Why?” That “Why” brought me
to my knees. “No particular reason,” I said. “It’s just that since you are
travelling alone, I feel I ought to warn you that there all sorts of people on
board. One might say dirty people, shameless people, especially when it
comes to defenceless young ladies such as yourself.” She looked at me and
said: “I know.” And then she smiled. At that moment I knew that I would
give all the blood in my body – drop by precious drop without so much as
even a groan – for every one of her smiles.
   ‘I never got another chance to speak to her. I did, however, take the
flowers from a couple of the other tables and put them on hers – a small
token, I thought, to show her she was dearer to me than all the world. Not
that she noticed.
   ‘Just before Simbirsk, Nikodim kicked up a row, and right in front of her
too. “What are you doing taking my flowers from the table? Tulips, no
less!” She guessed immediately what was going on and blushed but kept
her eyes down.
   ‘Believe me when I say I’ve never before told this story to a soul. You’re
the first. It’s not a thing you can tell the boys. They’ll turn it into something
dirty, but I swear to you on the life of my old mother, it was the finest thing
I’ve ever known. I may be a crook, an honest-to-God thief if you like, but
I’d never stoop so low as to tell this to the gang. Do you believe me?’
   ‘I do. Tell me, what happened in the end?’
   ‘It’s not over yet,’ he said, and then repeated himself in an unexpectedly
threatening voice: ‘It’s not over yet! That’s what I believe. And you’ve got
no right to put doubts in my head. Stop trying to confuse me. So . . . we
were supposed to arrive at Simbirsk the next morning, and you wouldn’t
guess what I was thinking. I now knew for certain that I couldn’t bear to be
parted from her. Whether from afar, or on the sly, I had to follow her until
my dying day. I didn’t need much. Just to breathe the air around her would
be enough, for any other air was poison for me. Can you believe this?
You’ve read books about love – this kind of thing has to be in there. Well,
that night I worked out a nice plan in my head. While it was still dark, I
stole the takings from the restaurant’s cash box and as soon as we tied up at
Simbirsk, I hopped ashore still dressed in my waiter’s outfit as if I were on
my way to buy some radishes. Except I never came back.
   ‘My clothes looked suspicious, but since I had some money, I was able to
buy myself a jacket. You can bet I tracked her down. To my good fortune,
just across from the house where she was living with her grandmother – an
old kind of place with a garden and goose-berry bushes – there was an inn.
It was small and rundown, didn’t even have a canary singing in a cage. I
took a seat and made myself comfortable. I made up a story about how I
was waiting for a friend to buy some geese from him in Simbirsk. The man
was obviously late. What I didn’t know myself at the time, you never buy
geese in summer, only in autumn.’
   ‘Well, did you see her?’ I asked.
   ‘I did. Twice. She waltzed right through my soul and took everything
with her. I had no idea what was happening, but I did know this: I was
happy. She didn’t suspect a thing, of course, and had no doubt already
forgotten all about me. I know, I’m not much to look at – got the teeth of a
ferret and the eyes of a rat. What’s more, one eye goes one way, the other
another. Damned things. Might as well tear them out. Nope, you can’t buy
or steal beauty, try all you will.’
   A Petlyura machine-gun fired a lazy burst from the edge of the woods
and then went quiet.
   ‘This is all nonsense,’ he said. ‘The Hetman, Petlyura. And all this fuss
and running about. I have no idea what the point of it is, and I don’t care to
find out.’
   He was silent for a while. I said: ‘Well, go on. Since you’ve started, don’t
stop.’
   ‘I’m not going to. I’d been in Simbirsk no more than ten days when the
innkeeper – a kind but sickly sort – took me aside and said in a whisper:
“The police have been nosing around here, asking about you. Careful,
young fellow, they don’t catch you. You a thief ?” “No, I’m no thief and I
never would have been if it hadn’t been for the love of a woman.” “Well,
the court won’t take love into account. It’s not in the book. You’d better not
come around here anymore. Look out for yourself.” And I decided – nope,
no jail for me. I had to be free as a bird if I wasn’t going to lose my woman.
I had to give them the slip, cover my tracks.
   ‘So, I left for Syzran that very day to lie low, but they caught up with me
like a sitting duck just three days later. They took me by boat to Samara
under the watch of two armed guards. We were approaching Simbirsk. I
looked out of the porthole and could see that very house and garden where
she lived. I asked the guards: “I haven’t eaten in two days, would you mind
bringing me up to the third-class buffet?” Well, they felt bad for me so they
took me there. I softly asked the barmaid if I might have a glass of vodka.
She poured me one. I drained it in one gulp, then smashed the glass, and
began tearing at my face with the jagged pieces still in my hand. It was like
I was washing my face with the bloody shards. Because of my unbearable
anguish. The whole counter was covered in blood. Ever since I’ve worn
these scars on my mug. Made me that much prettier.’
   ‘And then what?’ I asked.
   He looked at me and spat. ‘As if you don’t know. And then . . . shit for
supper. Give me a packet of Salve, or I’ll have you by the throat before you
can even blink. I’ve got a good grip. Things would be over real quick. Ah,
you dumb fool, I’ve told you a pack of lies. And look at you, snivelling like
a pup.’
   I gave him a packet of Salve.
   ‘Well, that’s that!’ he said, and got up and slowly walked away down the
trench. ‘But if you ever mention a word of this to the gang – now or in
thirty years – I’ll kill you dead. I bet you’re writing a little poem in your
head just now – “O love, what an enchanting dream!”’
   I watched him go, confused by this sudden outburst of anger.
   Out of the early morning mist, a shell came screaming from the direction
of Kiev. It seemed to be heading straight towards us, and I was not
mistaken. The shell hit the parapet and exploded. It sounded as though the
air around us had popped like a large iron balloon. Shrapnel whistled
through the air like a flight of swifts. The orderly turned with a look of
surprise, fell face first into the trench wall, spat one final curse together
with a mouthful of blood, and then slumped down into a puddle of muddy
snow. A crimson stain slowly spread over the snow.
   A second shell exploded near the foxhole. Pan Sotnik jumped out of the
bunker. Then the parapet was hit by another shell.
   ‘Our own guns!’ Pan Sotnik cried in a quivering voice, shaking his fist at
Kiev. ‘Shot at by our own troops! Idiots! Scoundrels! You’re shooting your
own men!’
   He turned to us. ‘Pull back to Priorka. On the double! No panicking! To
hell with your damned Hetman.’
   We took off running. With the sound of each new shell, we hit the
ground. Eventually, we made our way back down to Priorka. The first ones
there were, of course, the motor boys. It turned out that the Hetman’s
artillery had somehow decided that Petlyura’s men had overrun our trenches
and so opened fire on them. As we were retreating, Pan Sotnik stepped over
the orderly and without turning round said to me: ‘Take his documents just
in case. Maybe we can find his relatives. We can’t really just leave him like
a dog.’
   The orderly was lying face down. I rolled him over on his back. He was
still warm, and even though he was thin, he still seemed very heavy. He had
been hit by shrapnel in the neck. The blue mouth tattooed on his hand was
smeared with blood. I undid the buttons of the light blue Austrian greatcoat
he was wearing and took out of the pocket of his tunic a crumpled and
obviously forged identity card as well as an envelope addressed to a
‘Yelizaveta Tenisheva, 13 Sadovaya Street, Simbirsk’.
   The bedraggled, dwindling troops of the Hetman’s army had begun
assembling on the hay-strewn square in the centre of Priorka. The local
inhabitants were coming back out onto the streets, discussing the departure
of the Cossacks and rejoicing at their plight with unconcealed relish. But in
spite of everything, detachments of German cavalry on their well-fed bays
went on calmly patrolling the streets. Hetman or Petlyura – it was all the
same to the Germans; the main thing was to maintain order. Upon Pan
Sotnik’s command, we dumped all our rifles and ammunition in a pile on
the square. The Germans immediately rode up and stood guard over it.
They didn’t even bother to look our way.
   ‘And now, everybody go home!’ said Pan Sotnik, removing his yellow
and blue epaulettes and then tossing them on the ground. ‘As best you can.
It’s every man for himself. The city’s a mess. Petlyura’s men running up
one street, the Hetman’s fleeing down another. So, make sure you look both
ways – left and right – before crossing the street. I wish you good luck.’
   He smiled awkwardly at his own lame joke, gave us a friendly wave and
then hurried away. Some of the Cossacks removed their greatcoats and
either sold them then and there to some of the locals for a few kopecks or
just gave them away for free and walked away in nothing but tunics
stripped of their badges. I was cold and so I kept my greatcoat on, although
I did tear off the epaulettes. Wadding stuck out of the holes on my
shoulders, and so anyone could immediately guess what I was.
   I walked to St Cyril’s Church, where I had been long ago with my father
and Vrubel. At that time, this whole neighbourhood, with its knotty elm
trees and its deep ravines overgrown with hawthorn bushes, had seemed so
mysterious and threatening to me. Now I was slowly trudging up the steep,
dirty road to Lukyanovka, and I had no sense of the strangeness of the
place, or even of the times. No doubt I was simply too exhausted to notice
anything. I was aware, of course, that we were living in an epochal,
practically fantastical period in history, but at times it felt like a nightmare
or a grotesque distortion of reality. At that particular moment, all I could see
was the same dreary sky that had been hanging over these tumbledown
suburban streets and hovels thirty years ago. Vague ideas drifted through
my mind, and I wondered, how much longer could this ridiculous third-rate
show of Hetmans and Atamans and Petlyuras last? How much more of
these noisy slogans, of these muddled and hateful notions, exaggerated
beyond any sense of proportion, could we take? When would the curtain
finally come down on this makeshift stage on which real blood,
unfortunately, and not cranberry juice was being shed?
   Back in the city I did not look left or right before crossing the street. I
was sick to death of this cheap sideshow of war and politics, and anger
robbed me of all sense of danger. I walked through a column of Petlyura’s
men in my greatcoat with the torn epaulettes and was slammed in the back
by rifle butts, although only twice. Groups of ‘true’ Ukrainians standing in
sparse lines along the pavements cried ‘Hurrah!’ to the men and looked at
me with rabid loathing.
   Nonetheless, I managed to make it home, rang the bell, heard Amalia’s
joyful voice call out, opened the door, and collapsed in a chair in the hall,
light and happy thoughts whirling in my head, even though my greatcoat
was pressing on my chest, harder with each minute as though it were some
living creature trying to strangle me. Then I realised that it was not the coat,
but the long, gnarled fingers of the orderly crushing my neck for a packet of
Salve. I saw before my eyes the blue tattooed lips on his hand just before I
groaned and passed out. I had had fainting spells like this as a boy. They
were always a sign of exhaustion.


1 Symon Petlyura (1878–1926), Ukrainian independence leader, supreme
commander (ataman) of the Ukrainian army, president of the Ukrainian
People’s Republic 1918–21.
2   Reference to Pushkin’s 1830 drama of the same name.
3 Popular 1913 play by the Russian writer Mikhail Artsybashev (1878–
1927), best known for his scandalous novel Sanin (1907).
4 Alexander Vertinsky (1889–1957), famous cabaret artist, actor, poet and
composer.
5 Common anti-Semitic slur of the time with reference to three Jews: Vulf
Vysotsky (1824–1904), successful tea merchant; Israel Brodsky (1823–88),
founder of one of Russia’s largest sugar manufactories; and Bolshevik Leon
Trotsky (1879–1940).
OceanofPDF.com
81
The Violet Ray



Next morning, I awoke in my room to the sound of cheering outside and
assumed that Pan Petlyura, Ataman of the Ukrainian Army and the
Haidamaka Battalion,1 was making his triumphal entry into Kiev on a white
steed. Notices from the city commandant had gone up around Kiev the day
before stating with epic, humourless solemnity that Petlyura would be
entering the city as the head of the government – the Directorate – on a
white steed, a gift from the railway men of Zhmerinka. Why they had given
Petlyura a horse rather than a railway coach or even a shunting engine, no
one could say.
   Petlyura did not disappoint the hopes of Kiev’s housemaids, merchants,
governesses and shopkeepers. He truly did ride into the vanquished city on
a white though fairly placid steed. The horse had a pale blue saddlecloth
with a yellow border. Petlyura was modestly attired in a wadded khaki coat.
His only ornament was a curved Zaporozhian sword, apparently taken from
some museum, which slapped against his thigh as he rode along. Loyal
Ukrainians gazed reverently at the Cossack sword, the puffy pale face of
Petlyura and his guard of Haidamaks prancing behind him on their scruffy
horses. The Haidamaks, their heads shaven except for a long single forelock
of blue-black hair hanging from under their sheepskin hats, reminded me of
my childhood visits to the old Ukrainian theatre. There Haidamaks just like
these, their eyes inked blue, had wildly danced the gopak – ‘Hip, hop,
shout! Now here, now there, turn about!’
   Every nation has its own character, its own distinguishing traits. But the
chauvinists who drool over them, who lose all sense of proportion in their
fanatical worship, turn themselves, and these traits, into something pathetic
and at times even disgusting. That is why jingoists are a nation’s greatest
enemies. It was this syrupy idea of Ukraine that Petlyura tried to recreate.
Needless to say, he failed.
   Riding behind Petlyura came the Directorate – the writer Vynnychenko,2
a shambolic neurasthenic, and after him some ministers, all of them long-
mothballed and utterly unknown personages. So began the brief and foolish
reign of the Directorate. Prone to irony, the people of Kiev made the new
‘independent’ government the butt of a great many jokes. They were
especially delighted by the sight in the first days of the Directorate of
foppishly attired Haidamaks going up and down Kreshchatik with step-
ladders and removing all the Russian signs. Petlyura had brought with him
something called ‘Galician’, a rather clumsy dialect full of loan words
borrowed from Ukraine’s neighbours. Before this new intruder, the native
language of Ukraine – sparkling, witty, sing-song and as shiny as the pearly
teeth of the vibrant young village girls – retreated to the remote huts of
Shevchenko and the quiet fields of the countryside where it hid throughout
these troubled years, refusing to die and preserving all its poetry.
   Everything under Petlyura had a contrived air – the Haidamaks, the
language, the politics, the large number of grey-whiskered chauvinists who
crawled out of the woodwork, the money – everything, all the way down to
the Directorate’s progress reports to the people. But more of this later.
   Meeting a Haidamak in the street, people rubbed their eyes and asked
themselves: ‘Is that really a Haidamak or just some actor in costume?’
Hearing the tortured sounds of the new language, one couldn’t help
wondering: is that Ukrainian or some recently invented version of it? And
upon receiving change in a shop, you scratched your head with disbelief at
the smudgy little scraps of paper faintly marked with yellow and blue ink:
was this real or just some toy money from a children’s game? There was so
much counterfeit money being passed around that everyone decided to turn
a blind eye and take whatever they were given. Whether fake or genuine, all
banknotes were treated equally and exchanged at the same rate. You
couldn’t find a printing press in the entire city where typesetters and
printers weren’t laughing and happily turning out counterfeit Petlyura
banknotes – karbovantsy and shagi. The shag was the smallest unit, worth
about half a kopeck. Many enterprising people made their own counterfeit
notes at home using Indian ink and cheap watercolours. They didn’t even
bother to hide what they were doing when strangers dropped in.
   Few people were as busy making counterfeit money, as well as
homemade hooch, as Pan Kturenda. Ever since that bombastic little man
had pushed me into the Hetman’s army, he had shown me an affection
rather like a hangman’s for his victim. He was amazingly attentive and
always inviting me over. Interested in this last remnant of the nobility’s
lower rungs, somehow still afloat in what Pan Kturenda himself called ‘our
astonishing new era’, I did once go to visit him in his little room crowded
with carboys of murky home-brew. It had the sour smell of paint and the
particular medicine – the name escapes me – that was then used to treat
gonorrhoea.
   He was busy making hundred-rouble notes when I arrived. They were
decorated with the image of two sturdy, bare-legged women with sultry
eyes dressed in embroidered blouses. For some reason they were poised like
graceful ballerinas on swirls of intricate festoons, which Kturenda was
going over with a brush at that very moment. Pan Kturenda’s mother, a
gaunt old woman with a twitching face, was sitting behind a screen and
softly reading aloud from a Polish prayer-book.
   ‘The festoon is the alpha and omega of the Petlyura banknote,’ Pan
Kturenda instructed me. ‘You could just as easily replace these two young
Ukrainian ladies with any fat old women you like, it doesn’t matter at all.
What does matter are these festoons – they must look official. If they do,
you can easily change your hundred karbovantsy without anyone batting an
eyelid at these deliciously piquant ladies.’
   ‘How many can you make?’
   ‘In a day, I can paint’, Pan Kturenda said importantly, pushing out his lips
with the cropped little moustache, ‘as many as three notes. And sometimes
as many as five. Depends on how inspired I am.’
   ‘Bassya!’ said the old woman from behind the screen. ‘Bassya, my son.
I’m frightened.’
   ‘Oh, Mama, don’t you worry, nothing’s going to happen. No one would
dare to lay a finger on Pan Kturenda.’
   ‘It’s not prison I’m frightened of,’ she said unexpectedly. ‘It’s you,
Bassya.’
   ‘Water on the brain,’ said Pan Kturenda, gesturing towards the old lady.
‘Excuse me, Mama, but could you be quiet?’
   ‘No!’ she said. ‘No, I can’t. God will punish me if I don’t tell everyone
that my son is a Judas.’ By now she was sobbing.
   ‘Shut up!’ Pan Kturenda shouted in a frenzied voice. He jumped up from
his chair and shook the screen so violently that it danced about, creaked and
released a cloud of yellow dust. ‘Shut up, you silly old fool, or I’ll gag you
with an oil-rag.’
   The old woman sobbed and blew her nose.
   ‘What does she mean?’ I asked him.
   ‘That’s my own personal business,’ he replied defiantly. His distorted
face was covered with criss-crossing veins. It looked as though they might
burst at any moment. ‘I advise you not to stick your nose into my affairs,
unless you want to end up in some common grave with the Bolsheviks.’
   ‘Bastard,’ I said quietly. ‘You’re such a cheap little bastard you’re not
even worth these measly hundred karbovantsy.’
   ‘Under the ice!’ Pan Kturenda yelled hysterically, stamping his feet.
‘That’s what Pan Petlyura does to people like you – tosses them into the
Dnieper and under the ice!’
   I told Amalia about the incident. She said she suspected Pan Kturenda
had worked as an informer for all the successive governments that had
ravaged Ukraine – the Central Rada, the Germans, the Hetman and now
Petlyura. She was convinced he would try to get back at me. It was only a
matter of time until he denounced me to the new authorities. And so, careful
and practical as she was, Amalia set up her own watch on Pan Kturenda that
very day. By evening, however, her precautions were no longer necessary,
for he had died right before our eyes. His death proved as pointless as the
whole of his mean, boorish life.
   At dusk we heard pistol shots outside. Whenever this happened, I went
out onto the balcony to see what was going on. This time I saw two
civilians running towards our house across the empty square in front of St
Vladimir’s Cathedral. They were being chased and shot at by a few Petlyura
officers and soldiers. ‘Stop!’ they shouted, although it was clear from their
efforts that their pursuit was only half-hearted.
   Just then I noticed Pan Kturenda run from his room in the other wing of
the house to the heavy front gate and remove a key big enough to be from
some medieval city. Key in hand, he hid behind the gate. As the two men in
civilian garb were running past, Pan Kturenda flung open the gate, pointed
the key at them like a pistol (it actually did look like an antiquated firearm
from a distance) and shouted: ‘Stop right there, you Bolshevik scum, or I’ll
shoot!’ Pan Kturenda wanted to help Petlyura’s men by slowing the
civilians down, if only for a moment, and this moment would, of course,
have sealed their fate.
   I had a clear view from the balcony of what happened next. The second
of the two men raised a pistol and without bothering to look, much less aim,
fired in the direction of Kturenda as he ran. Pan Kturenda, screaming and
spitting blood, stumbled back into the yard, tripped on the cobblestones,
fell, let out a desperate wheeze, and died. He was still clutching the key in
his hand. Blood dripped onto his pink celluloid cuffs, and in his open eyes
was a look of angry terror. More than an hour passed before a rickety ‘First
Aid’ cart arrived to take Pan Kturenda to the morgue.
   His mother slept through her son’s death and learned of it only that night.
A few days later the old woman was sent to the ancient Sulimovskaya
Almshouse. I often came across its residents on my walks. They always
went about in pairs, like schoolgirls, dressed in identical dresses of dark
Toile du Nord fabric. Seeing them in the streets made me think of a solemn
procession of ground-beetles.
   I have described this insignificant incident with Pan Kturenda for the sole
reason that it was so in keeping with the tenor of life under the Directorate.
Everything was petty, mean and ridiculous, like a badly produced but at
times tragic farce.

                                      •

One day, enormous posters went up all over Kiev informing the populace
that the Directorate would be giving a report of its progress in the Ars
Cinema. The whole city tried to squeeze into the cinema to hear the report.
Everyone was expecting an unusual show, and they were not disappointed.
   The long, narrow hall was wrapped in a mysterious gloom. None of the
lights had been lit. The crowd made a cheerful hum in the darkness. All of a
sudden, a gong boomed behind the stage curtain, coloured footlights came
alive, and then there appeared, against a garish backdrop depicting ‘The
Miraculous Dnieper in Still Weather’, an elderly but handsome man in
black with a luxurious beard – Premier Vynnychenko. Unhappy and clearly
uncomfortable, constantly fidgeting with his bright tie, he delivered a short,
dry speech on the international affairs of Ukraine. The audience applauded.
Next, an unbelievably skinny young woman with a heavily powdered face
came out onto the stage. She was wearing a black dress and clutching her
hands out in front of her in a gesture meant to convey utter despair. As the
accompanist struck a variety of pensive chords, she recited in a frightened
voice the verses of the poetess Galina: ‘They’re cutting down the young
woods, the tender, green woods . . .’3 They applauded her as well.
   In between the ministers’ speeches there were short musical interludes,
and little girls and boys danced the gopak after the minister of
communications spoke. The audience was thoroughly enjoying itself, but a
guarded silence settled over it when out onto the stage plodded the old
‘Minister of Sovereign Balances’, as the minister of finance was called. He
had a dishevelled, truculent look. He was snorting with anger. His round,
closely cropped head glistened with sweat. His silver Cossack moustache
drooped over his chin. He wore baggy grey pinstriped trousers, an equally
baggy silk coat with large pockets and an embroidered shirt tied at the neck
with a cord dangling red pompoms at the ends.
   He had no intention of delivering a report. He approached the footlights
and stuck an ear out to listen to the faint murmur in the hall. For effect, he
even cupped a hand over this furry ear. People laughed. The minister
grinned with a satisfied air, nodded as though at some passing thoughts, and
asked: ‘Muscovites?’
   Sure enough, almost everyone in the audience was Russian. Yes, they
answered unsuspectingly, most of us here are Muscovites.
   ‘I see-e-e-e,’ the minister said ominously and then blew his nose into a
large checked handkerchief. ‘It’s all very understandable, although not at all
pleasant.’
   The murmuring in the hall ceased. The audience sensed trouble.
   ‘Just what the hell were you thinking?’ he suddenly thundered in
Ukrainian. His face had turned as red as a beetroot. ‘What the hell were you
thinking coming here from your rotten Moscow? Like flies to honey. May
lightning strike you dead! Just think of what you’ve seen here! You’re here
because you’ve so ruined Moscow that not only do you have nothing to eat,
you don’t even have anything to eat it with!’
   The audience erupted with anger. People were hooting and whistling.
Someone jumped up on stage, carefully took the ‘Minister of Sovereign
Balances’ by the arm and tried to lead him away, but the old man gave him
a shove and nearly knocked him over. The minister had got into his stride.
He wasn’t going to stop now.
   ‘Well, why don’t you say something?’ he asked. ‘Hmm? Playing the fool,
are you now? All right then, I’ll say it for you. Here in Ukraine you can
help yourselves to all the bread and sugar and lard and buckwheat and cakes
you want. Back home in Moscow you’d be sucking lamp oil off your
thumbs. And that’s the truth!’
   By now two men had grabbed onto the tails of the minister’s silk coat and
were trying to carefully pull him off the stage, but he was furiously fighting
them off and shouting: ‘Beggars! Parasites! Back to Moscow with you! Go
home and die under your Yid government! Back to Moscow, all of you!’
   Vynnychenko appeared in the wings. He was waving his hand angrily,
and finally the old minister, red from indignation, was dragged off the stage.
To ease the unfortunate impression left by the minister, out onto the stage
hopped a group of young men with sheepskin hats poised jauntily on their
heads. Some struck up their banduras, others threw themselves into the
national dance, squatting and leaping as they sang:

       Oy, who’s the corpse lying there at the funeral?
       Not the Prince, not the Pan, not the Colonel,
       It can only be the old crone’s love eternal!

   And with that, the Directorate’s report to the people came to a close.
Laughing and shouting ‘Back to Moscow with you! Go home and die under
your Yid government!’ the audience poured out of the Ars Cinema and into
the street.
   Petlyura and the entire Ukrainian Directorate had a provincial air about
them. Once glittering Kiev had been turned into a glorified Shpola or
Mirgorod, with their stuffy, hide-bound officialdom, their interminable
meetings, their Dovgochkhuns.4 It looked as though the city had been made
over as a stage-set for ‘ye olde Ukraine’, right down to the pastry shop’s
‘Taras Bulba of Poltava’ sign. Bulba, with his long white moustache and his
snow-white shirt emblazoned with scarlet embroidery, cut such an operatic,
and intimidating, figure that many potential customers were too frightened
to come in and ask for biscuits and honey. One couldn’t be certain whether
this was meant to be taken seriously or was just some sort of performance
starring the lead characters of Haidamaki.5
   It was impossible to make sense of what was happening. These were
feverish, violent times when one coup quickly followed another. Within
days of the appearance of a new government, clear signs of its imminent
and ignominious collapse appeared. Each hurried to pronounce as many
decrees and resolutions as possible in the hope that at least some of them
would catch on and leave their mark on history. The governments of both
Petlyura and the Hetman made an impression of utter confusion and a lack
of confidence in the future.
   To the north, Petlyura faced the unforgiving threat of the Soviet forces,
and so he had placed all his hopes in the French, then occupying Odessa.
His government began circulating rumours that the French were on their
way to save Kiev. People were saying that they had already reached
Vinnitsa and Fastov and that any day now the brave French Zouaves in their
red trousers and handsome fezzes would reach Boyarka on the outskirts of
the capital. Petlyura’s bosom friend, the French consul Hénault, had given
his word of honour on the matter. Bewildered by all the conflicting
rumours, the newspapers decided to print every single bit of this nonsense
even though it was obvious to nearly everyone that the French were sitting
tight in Odessa and sticking to their zone of occupation, although the
various ‘zones of influence’ (French, Greek, Ukrainian) were separated by
nothing more than some rickety old bentwood chairs.
   Rumours during the days of Petlyura became an elemental force,
practically a cosmic phenomenon, an epidemic of the plague. It felt like a
form of mass hypnosis. Rumours had lost their normal purpose – to spread
made-up facts – and acquired a new essence. They had become a means of
self-reassurance, an incredibly powerful narcotic medicine. Rumours were
the only thing that gave people hope for tomorrow.
   Even outwardly, the people of Kiev began to look like morphine addicts.
With each new rumour, their dull eyes caught fire, their usual torpor
disappeared and their mumbled speech became lively again, witty even.
There were fleeting rumours and there were rumours that hung around long
enough to keep people in a state of delusional agitation for two or three
days. Even the most hardened sceptics eventually surrendered to the
rumours, like the one about how Ukraine was going to be declared a
department of France and President Poincaré himself was on his way to
Kiev to be present at the glorious official announcement, or the one about
how the film actress Vera Kholodnaya had recruited her own army and, like
Joan of Arc on her white steed, entered the town of Priluki outside Kiev at
the head of her victorious troops, and proclaimed herself empress of
Ukraine.
   At one point I began keeping a list of all these rumours but then gave up.
It was enough to give you a terrible headache or even drive you quietly
insane. I wanted to destroy every last one of them, beginning with
Presidents Poincaré and Wilson and ending with Makhno and the notorious
Ataman Zelëny, who had set himself up at Tripolie outside Kiev. I now wish
I had saved that list. In fact, it was an outrageous Apocrypha of lies and the
unbridled fantasies of helpless, bewildered souls. To keep my sanity, I
reread some of my favourite books which I never grew tired of –
Turgenev’s Torrents of Spring, Boris Zaitsev’s The Blue Star, Tristan and
Isolde, Manon Lescaut. In the murky darkness of those Kiev nights, these
books truly did shine for me like inextinguishable stars.
   I was living alone. Mama and Galya were still completely cut off from
Kiev. I had no news of them. I had decided that come spring I would make
my way to Kopan on foot, even though I had been warned that I would
never make it past the ‘Dymerskaya Republic’, an utterly mysterious and
lawless territory that lay along my path. I was alone with my books. I tried
to do some writing, but everything came out shapeless and read like the
ravings of a madman. I had nothing to share my loneliness with except the
nights when silence descended over our house and the neighbourhood and
everyone slept except for the clouds, the stars and the occasional patrol. The
sound of the patrolman’s footsteps carried from afar. Every time I heard
them, I put out the oil lamp to keep the patrols from stopping at our house.
Once in a while I heard Amalia crying at night, and this reminded me that
her loneliness was much worse than mine. For a few days after these tears
she spoke to me in a haughty, almost hostile tone, but then she would
suddenly make a shy, apologetic smile and return to her usual self, showing
me the same great care that she had extended to all her lodgers.

                                      •

Revolution broke out in Germany. The German troops stationed in Kiev
quietly and dutifully elected their Soviet of Soldiers’ Deputies and prepared
to return home. Petlyura decided to take advantage of their weakness and
disarm them. The Germans discovered his plan.
   I awoke on the morning of Petlyura’s planned operation with the feeling
that the walls of our house were gently shaking in rhythm. There was the
loud banging of drums. I went out onto the balcony. Amalia was already
there. German forces were goose-stepping in silence down
Fundukleevskaya Street. The pounding of their hob-nailed boots made the
windows shake. The drums thundered out a warning. After the infantry
came the cavalry, the riders’ faces equally grim, the horseshoes clicking
together in time, and finally the artillery, jolting and rumbling down the
paved road. Without saying a word, accompanied by nothing but the roll of
the drums, the Germans marched once around the whole city and then
returned to their barracks. Petlyura immediately rescinded his secret order.
   Soon after the Germans’ silent demonstration, distant artillery fire could
be heard from the left bank of the Dnieper. The Germans were hurriedly
clearing out of Kiev. The shelling grew ever louder, and everyone in the city
realised that Soviet troops were quickly advancing from Nezhin. When the
battle for Kiev began, in the outskirts near Brovary and Darnitsa, and we all
understood that Petlyura was finished, his city commandant issued one last
decree. It stated that the following night the High Command of Petlyura’s
army was going to unleash a terrifying secret weapon against the
Bolsheviks – namely, a deadly Violet Ray which French military leaders
had given to Petlyura thanks to the mediation of that famous ‘Friend of Free
Ukraine’, Consul Hénault. To avoid unnecessary casualties from the Violet
Ray, the entire populace of the city was ordered to take shelter in their
cellars for the night and not to come out until daylight.
   The people of Kiev were used to climbing down into their cellars, where
they would wait out one coup after another. After the cellar, the next safest
spot was the kitchen. It was a sort of citadel for interminable conversations
and tea drinking. Kitchens were usually located at the back of the house,
and so were relatively safe from bullets. There was something comforting
about the smell of old food that clung to the kitchens. Sometimes water
dripped from the tap, and if you left your cup in the sink, in an hour or so
you could fill an entire kettle, put it on to boil and brew some strong tea out
of dried cranberry leaves. Everyone who drank that tea during those nights
would agree that it was our sole comfort, a sort of elixir of life, a panacea
for all our troubles and misfortunes.
   It seemed to me that the country was racing straight into a bank of
impenetrable fog. As I lay there listening to the whistling of the wind
through the bullet-riddled roofs, I found it impossible to believe that these
impossibly dark nights, thick with soot and despair, would ever give way to
a bleak dawn, if only to reveal once again the same deserted streets and the
same blindly running men, armed with every possible make and calibre of
rifle, their faces green from ice and hunger, their feet frozen, their fingers
stiff from the cold of steel triggers. Every last bit of human warmth had
been blown out of these men through their threadbare greatcoats and their
coarse calico shirts.
   The city was deathly quiet on the night of the Violet Ray. Even the
artillery fire had stopped, and all that could be heard was the sound of
wheels rumbling in the distance. The more experienced of the residents
recognised the sound – it was that of army convoys hurriedly withdrawing
from the city. And that is just what happened. The next morning, not one of
Petlyura’s men was left in the city. The story of the Violet Ray had been
concocted simply so they could leave Kiev that night without any trouble.
   As had happened many times before, Kiev was left without a
government. But neither the atamans nor the local gangs had time to take
over. At noon – horses steaming, wheels clattering, crowds shouting and
singing, accordions wheezing – the Bogunsky and Tarashchansky Red
Army regiments crossed into the city over the Tsepnoy Bridge and once
more life was shaken to its very foundations.
   There was, to quote the theatrical expression, a complete change of
scenery, although no one could guess what the future held in store for the
famished citizens. Only time would tell.


1 The Haidamaki (Haidamaks) were Ukrainian Cossack military groups that
arose in the early eighteenth century.
2Volodymyr Vynnychenko (1880–1951), Communist revolutionary, writer,
head of the Ukrainian government 1917–18, died in exile.
3 Opening line of a poem by Glafira Mamoshina (1873–1942, pen-name
Galina Galina) written in response to state suppression of a radical Kievan
university movement.
4Ivan Nikiforovich Dovgochkhun, one of the petty noble landowners in
Gogol’s ‘The Story of How Ivan Ivanovich Quarrelled with Ivan
Nikiforovich’ (1834).
5 Shevchenko’s epic historical poem from 1841 that tells the story of a
bloody eighteenth-century Ukrainian rebellion known as the Koliivshchyna.
OceanofPDF.com
82
The Bolshevik and the Haidamachka



Rain-soaked     notices with menacing decrees from the newly established
Military-Revolutionary Committee appeared on walls around the city. The
decrees were short and momentous. Ruthlessly and without reservation,
they divided the population of Kiev into worthwhile people and human
rubbish. They began to clean out the rubbish, although it turned out there
wasn’t much of it left. It had taken to hiding in hard-to-find places, where it
settled down to wait for better days. My experiences from Moscow started
all over again. But there was a difference – here in Kiev I noticed an added
air of licence and recklessness.
   The Bogunsky Regiment was quartered in private homes throughout
Kiev. Four soldiers were billeted in our flat. They brought a bomb used by
aeroplanes, carefully laid it on the floor in the front hall under a bentwood
hat-stand, and said to Amalia: ‘Dearie, do be careful now and don’t so
much as lay a finger on this here, or there’ll be such a big bang that your
entire home and everything in it will be nothing more than a memory.
Understood?’
   ‘Understood,’ she replied through pursed lips. She opened the door to the
back stairs, and from then on no one used the front door again.
   The soldiers of the Bogunsky Regiment carried so much weaponry with
them it was hard to imagine how they ever got anywhere. They had
everything: machine-guns, rifles, hand-grenades, Brownings, Mausers,
sawn-off shotguns, hunting knives, daggers, swords. They also carried with
them purple and red gramophone horns, sentimental reminders of
peacetime.
   As soon as the soldiers occupied a city, strains of long-forgotten, heart-
rending romances wafted from every window. Once more, a morose
baritone complained, his voice quivering, of nowhere to go and no one to
love, while a lisping tenor lamented that never again would springtime
come for him, no, not for him would the river Bug course mightily, nor
would his heart ever again throb with joy. Once more, shouting ‘Hai-da-
Troika!’, Vyaltseva galloped off, and a lovely seagull expired on some lake
of flaming waters. Everything was all jumbled together – Varya Panina>1
and hand-grenades, the smell of iodoform and the soft sing-song of
Ukrainian speech, the red cockades on the Cossack hats and symphony
concerts, soldiers’ dreams of still ponds amid peaceful meadows and the
hysterical cries of illegal traders being rounded up in the bazaars.
   A kind, feeble old engineer by the name of Belelyubsky lived together
with his wife in the flat below us. He had once been famous throughout the
world as the constructor of the bridge over the Volga at Syzran. The
Belelyubskys had a maid, a jolly, red-cheeked girl named Motrya. The
regimental sergeant-major fell in love with her and proposed. Motrya
hesitated. The officer insisted. Motrya still wasn’t sure. She had some rather
old-fashioned notions about marriage. She was afraid that he was trying to
sweep her off her feet just so he could move in with her for a few days and
then be gone for good.
   One day Motrya came to me and with the direct honesty of a country girl
said that she had nearly given in to the sergeant’s advances but had run
away in time and was now willing to have him but only if he agreed to
marry her ‘according to the Book’ and promised to love her for life. She
dictated to me a letter for him that comprised four short words: ‘Yes, if for
life.’ I wrote it down in big block letters. About an hour later, having
received the letter, the sergeant began charging up and down the halls,
swearing to high heaven and barging in and out of the flats in search of the
regimental seal. ‘Which one of you bandits hid the damned seal?’ he
screamed at his men. He had a gun in his hand. ‘I’ll shoot every last one of
you Yids if it’s not returned to me this instant!’
   The house shook from the tramping of boots. The sergeant began
emptying out the men’s knapsacks. Finally, the seal was found. ‘I swear, for
life’ he wrote on the letter, and then affixed the regimental seal for good
measure and sent it back to Motrya. And so, Motrya gave in.
   A large, noisy wedding was celebrated two days later. A few gun-
carriages drove up to the house. Coloured ribbons had been braided into the
excited horses’ manes. And even though it could not have been more than
two hundred metres from our house to St Vladimir’s Cathedral, where the
ceremony was set to take place, the entire wedding party climbed onto the
carriages and roared off. They drove round and round the cathedral several
times, to the sound of clanging bells, hoots and whistles, and rollicking
song:

       I sit on a barrel,
       My head all a whirl,
       I’m now a Bolshevik bride,
       A Haidamachka with pride!
       Ekh, lil’ darling, for whom are you yearning?
       If Bogun should get you, you won’t be returning!
       Bogun’s our commander,
       You know what he’s after,
       Tho’ covered with holes and scars,
       He still makes the girls see stars!

   At the words ‘Ekh, lil’ darling’ the drivers pulled up on the reins and the
horses stopped, pranced and shook the bells in time to the tune. It was a
brilliant performance, and a large crowd had formed before the cathedral to
watch and cheer.
   On the third day (when for some reason trouble always seems to happen)
the regiment was roused in the middle of the night. They gathered
themselves reluctantly, in silence, saying only when questioned: ‘They’re
sending us to Zhitomir. To restore order. The priests there are rebelling.’
   Motrya was sobbing. Her worst fears had come to pass – the sergeant was
leaving and never coming back. At this the sergeant flew into a rage. ‘Herd
all the lodgers out into the yard!’ he yelled at his men, punctuating his
words upon reaching the bottom of the stairs by firing his pistol into the
ceiling. ‘Everybody into the courtyard! This instant, you bloody parasites!’
   The men forced the frightened lodgers out of their rooms and into the
yard. It was late on a winter night. Ice crystals hung in the still, cold air.
Women cried and clutched their sleepy, quivering children to their breasts.
   ‘Stop your carrying on,’ the soldiers said. ‘Nothing’s going to happen to
you. It’s just our sergeant, that devilish Motrya drives him mad.’
   The sergeant lined up his men to face the frightened group of lodgers and
then stepped forward. He was holding a wailing Motrya by the hand. They
came to a stop in the middle of the icy yard. He drew his sword, scratched a
large cross in the ice, and shouted: ‘Warriors and citizens of a free Russia!
You are my witnesses that by this cross and by my native land, I swear
never to desert my queen and to return to her. And I swear that we shall
make a home together in the village of Moshny near the celebrated town of
Kanev, and to this I sign my name and pledge my troth.’
   He hugged Motrya, who was still crying, and then gently pushed her
away and barked at his men: ‘Mount the carriages! March!’
   The men flung themselves up onto the carriages and hurtled out of the
yard whistling and singing. We could hear the metal wheels thunder off
down Bibikovsky Boulevard in the direction of the Zhitomirsky Highway. It
was all over. Motrya dried her tears. ‘To hell with him, the damned
heathen!’ she said before turning and going back inside to the
Belelyubskys’ flat. Life resumed its normal course. Yet it seemed to have
lost some of its lustre, and soon the people of Kiev began to speak about the
Bogunsky Regiment with unmistakable nostalgia. The soldiers had been
cheerful, big-hearted and incredibly brave young men. They had brought
with them the smell of battle, bullet-ridden red banners, dashing songs and
a selfless devotion to the revolution. They had come and gone, but for a
long time afterwards a current of revolutionary romanticism pulsed through
Kiev, bringing a smile to the faces of its citizens who had been through so
much.
   The man in charge of the Bogunsky Regiment at the time was named
Shchors. He soon became a legend. I first heard of him from his men, who
told me ecstatic stories of their commander’s uncompromising bravery and
talent. What amazed me the most was the men’s devoted, almost childlike,
love for Shchors. For them, he embodied the best possible qualities of
military leadership – steadfastness, resourcefulness, fairness, admiration for
the common man and inexhaustible and, if one can put it so, sober
romanticism. The men of the Bogunsky Regiment were young, and so was
Shchors. Their youth combined with their faith in the victory of the
revolution had transformed this military unit into a sort of brotherhood,
strengthened by a shared enthusiasm and by the blood they had spilled
together.

                                      •

No external events could slow the sap rising in the trees. And so, at the
appropriate moment, spring returned, the Dnieper overflowed its banks, the
weeds in the fields grew taller than a man’s head and the battle-scarred
chestnut trees put out their plump leaves and, for some reason, bloomed
with unusual splendour. It seemed to me at times that these trees were the
only thing left untouched in the world. Just as before, their leaves rustled
over the pavements and cast deep shadows. Just as before, their shapely
candles of pink and yellow-flecked flowers blossomed gently and discreetly
on the branches. But no more dreamy-eyed schoolgirls strolled in these
shadows, and among the dried blossoms that had fallen to the pavement lay
shell casings that had turned green over the winter and stiff, grubby rolls of
bandage.
   Spring glistened over Kiev, steeping the city in vibrant blue. At long last,
the lime trees blossomed in the parks, and their scent filtered into the
houses sealed up tight over the winter and forced the city dwellers to throw
open their windows and balcony doors. Soon after, summer stole into the
rooms, bringing warmth and light breezes, and all our fears and troubles
dissolved in its drowsy peace. It’s true, however, that we had no bread, and
survived on nothing more than last year’s frozen potatoes.
   I got a job at a strange organisation. It was almost impossible to
pronounce the abbreviation for its name. I only recall the beginning:
‘Obgubsnabchuprod . . .’ The rest was so complicated that even the
organisation’s director, a fat Armenian with a black imperial and a Mauser
slung around his neck (just as one would carry a camera), snorted and
frowned every time he signed a piece of letterhead. It’s hard to say what the
organisation dealt in exactly. It was mostly calico. The corridors and rooms
were all piled high with bales of calico. They were never sold or given to
anyone under any circumstances. Rather, the bales were being constantly
delivered, then taken away to the warehouse, then dragged back and stacked
up again in the corridors. This perpetual back and forth and back and forth
drove the employees out of their minds.
   I had a good deal of free time. I tried to track down my old school-mates,
but no one was left in Kiev other than Emma Shmukler. I rarely saw him.
He had become quiet and sad, perhaps because his family had forced him to
give up his dream of becoming a painter. Emma’s father had become ill, and
so all the responsibilities fell on Emma. He alone had to protect his
relations against famine, requisitioning, eviction, Petlyura’s pogroms and
raids, and what was called at the time uplotnenie, ‘consolidation’, when
whole families moved into a single room and the rest of their flat was
handed over to strangers.
   Once again, as in my schooldays, I went to evening concerts in the
garden of the former Merchants’ Club. The roses and canna lilies were all
gone, replaced by mint and wormwood. Quite often extraneous sounds
found their way into the music – distant explosions, the crackle of gunfire –
but no one took the slightest notice.
   During those days in Kiev I became consumed by the works of that great
French writer and literary mystifier, Stendhal. I never gave much thought to
the nature of his mystifications, for I considered them perfectly legitimate,
as I still do, since they testified to an inexhaustible store of ideas and
images so varied that it was unthinkable to combine them under one name.
No one would ever believe that one person was capable of penetrating so
deeply into so many and such different areas of life – painting, the steel
trade, daily life in the French provinces, the fog of war at Waterloo, the art
of seduction, the rejection of the bourgeois age, the work of the
quartermaster, the music of Cimarosa and Haydn.
   When I learned that his extensive diaries, so full of exciting events and
rich with ideas, were largely fictitious, but so convincingly written that even
the most knowledgeable experts of the era were fooled by them, I could
only bow before the genius and literary courage of this mysterious and
solitary figure. Ever since he has been my secret friend. It is difficult to say
how many times I have strolled through Rome and the Vatican, how many
trips I have taken to the provincial towns of France, how many operas I
have seen at La Scala, and how many brilliant conversations among the
great minds of the nineteenth century I have overheard in the company of
this clumsy, puzzling man.
   Soon my luck changed. The writers Mikhail Koltsov and Yefim Zozulya2
arrived in Kiev from Moscow. They began to publish an art magazine, and I
was taken on as its literary editor. The work was light. The magazine was
quite meagre, something along the lines of a school exercise book with half
the pages torn out. Self-confident, ironical and witty, Koltsov rarely came
by the office. I spent my days in the single room with Zozulya, who was so
short-sighted, kind and accommodating that he could never be mistaken for
the popular ‘man of steel’ from Moscow.
   I showed Zozulya the beginning of my first and still unfinished novel,
The Romantics. He genuinely liked it but did say that I had overdone the
self-analysis bits and that, besides, it was too wordy. Zozulya was then
writing a series of stories no longer than half a dozen lines each. He liked to
say that every story was ‘shorter than a sparrow’s beak’. They resembled
fables and had a clear moral. He considered literature to be a form of
teaching, a sermon. For me, literature possessed something much greater
than this narrow utilitarian function, and so we quarrelled constantly.
   By then I was already convinced that genuine literature was the purest
form of expression for a free spirit’s heart and mind, that only in literature
could an artist reveal all the complex richness and power of the human soul,
and in that way redeem us, in a sense, of the many sins of our commonplace
lives. I thought of literature as a gift, given to us by a distant and precious
future, that reflected humanity’s dream over the centuries for perfect
harmony and un-dying love on this earth, a dream that is born and dies
every day but refuses to expire for good. As the quiet hum of a seashell
awakens our desire to behold the still expanse of a misty sea, or the silver
smoke of clouds flying across the sky, or the oceans of cleansing air rising
from a damp forest, or a child’s ringing voice, or the profound silence of the
world, so literature draws us closer to the golden age of our thoughts, our
feelings and our actions.
   Meanwhile, as Zozulya and I sat arguing about literature, Atamans
Zelëny and Struk were prowling around Kiev and making raids here and
there on the outskirts. Once Struk managed to occupy the entire district of
Podol, and it took a great deal of effort to dislodge him. Denikin’s army was
advancing from the south.3 On the steppes beyond Kremenchug, Makhno
and his men raped and pillaged. But few people in Kiev talked about such
matters or bothered to take them seriously. There had been so many false
rumours that no one even believed in real facts anymore.


1 Varvara Panina (1872–1911), popular singer of Gypsy songs and early
recording star.
2 Mikhail Koltsov (1898–1940), Bolshevik, powerful Soviet journalist,
arrested and executed as an enemy of the people; Yefim Zozulya (1891–
1941), journalist and war correspondent killed covering World War II.
3 Anton Denikin (1872–1947), former tsarist general, leader of the
Volunteer Army against the Bolsheviks.

                         OceanofPDF.com
83
Crimson Riding Breeches



My good-humoured arguments with Zozulya about art and literature came
to an unexpected end with my call-up. So far, my short-sightedness had
guaranteed me a so-called ‘white ticket’, meaning a deferral from military
service. But now they were calling up everyone. Along with a few sickly
youths, I was given a perfunctory medical examination and packed off to
the ‘Prisoners’ Regiment’. As far as I can tell, this was the most bizarre
regiment in all of history.
   In one of the skirmishes with Makhno’s forces, a top adjutant had been
captured. His name was either Antoshchenko or Antonyuk, I don’t recall.
We’ll call him Antoshchenko. Such were Antoshchenko’s crimes that he
was sentenced to death by firing squad. As he awaited execution in a cell of
Kiev’s Lukyanovskaya prison, his crazed mind sought a plan for salvation.
   Antoshchenko sent for the prosecutor and dictated to him a letter for the
local head of the Extraordinary Commission.1 He wrote that the Soviet
government didn’t know what to do with the bandits it had captured. There
were too many of them to shoot and what with the widespread shortage of
food it made no sense to feed all these parasites. It was for these reasons
that the bandits had simply been disarmed and released, and most of them
immediately returned to their atamans and went straight back to looting,
pillaging and murdering all over Ukraine. Antoshchenko offered a way out
of this predicament: instead of shooting him, the Soviets should release
him, and as an expression of his gratitude Antoshchenko promised to form
an exemplary regiment out of the large number of imprisoned thugs and
killers. He noted the great respect he commanded among these men and
insisted that he alone had the authority to succeed with such a plan.
   The government decided it was worth taking the risk and freed
Antoshchenko. And he really did organise in quick fashion this Prisoners’
Regiment, made up of separate companies of captured bandits based on
their gang affiliations. There was the Makhno Company, the Struk
Company, the Zelëny Company, and others for the Angel Hearts, the Red
Coats and the Grigorievites. A final one was formed from members of
smaller, less important gangs, referred to as ‘the Forgotten Slaves
Company’. It was to this Prisoners’ Regiment that we ‘white-ticket men’
were assigned.
   An escort picked us up at the recruiting station and took us to the
regimental HQ in the Pechersk neighbourhood. Along the way he refused to
acknowledge our questions but muttered from time to time in an ominous
way: ‘He’s a viper, that one, you’ll see soon enough’ or ‘So much as look
cross-eyed at him and you’re done for.’ Apparently, he was referring to
Commander Antoshchenko.
   Upon arrival they lined us up with other conscripts opposite a small old
house. The tops of the lilacs in the garden extended beyond the roofline.
There were no obvious signs of danger, although the tense, pale faces of the
escorts did not bode well. A short man with bushy black side-whiskers and
crooked crab legs waddled out of the house. He wore a red wool tunic,
crimson riding breeches with silver piping, enormous, clanking spurs and
boots made of red leather. To this he had added red leather gloves on his
pudgy hands and a scarlet-tipped Cossack hat pulled low over his forehead.
It was the exact caricature of a ‘Red Commander’ as envisioned by
Makhno’s men.
   None of us conscripts dared to so much as smile. Just the opposite – we
shuddered upon catching sight of the man’s eyes, bright and almost white
with malice. We guessed this had to be Antoshchenko. On one side of the
belt around his waist hung a Mauser with a large wooden butt and on the
other a curved sabre in a sheath decorated with silver. He pulled a snow-
white handkerchief from the pocket of his riding breeches, delicately shook
it out and wiped his lips before asking in a hoarse voice: ‘Who’d you bring
me this time, slaves? More scum of the earth?’
   The escorts were silent. Antoshchenko slowly walked up and down the
ranks, inspecting each one of us from head to toe. Two lanky officers
walked behind him. We assumed they must have been battalion
commanders. All of a sudden, Antoshchenko unsheathed his sabre and cried
in a high, plaintive voice: ‘I’m going to teach you to serve the revolution,
and when I’m done, I’m going to have my way with your mothers!
Understand, you bastards? Do you know who I am? I carved up General
Kaledin with this very sword, so just imagine what I can do to the likes of
you with it. I spit up a dozen mugs of blood a day, I’ve taken more bullets
for the Fatherland than any man alive, and that’s why Moscow sends me
thirty thousand gold roubles a month, just for pocket money. Did you know
that, eh? Well, if not, maybe you do know that I don’t waste my time on
human scum like you. Some hot lead in the back of the head and into the
ditch, that’s how I handle things!’
   He was shrieking by now. Spit bubbles popped in the corners of his
mouth. Clearly the man was either insane or an epileptic. Stepping up close
to a tall youth in spectacles, a student most likely, he prodded him on the
chin with his sword hilt. ‘And what’s your problem?’ he asked, staring
drunkenly at the boy. ‘What are the glasses for? With these very hands I
killed my wife for sleeping with another man.’ He had spread out his short
fat fingers and was holding them up to us. The blood-red gloves were
several sizes too big for him. ‘Do you think because you’re wearing glasses,
I’ll spare you? Why, I could just as easily skin you alive, and no one would
lift a finger to stop me.’
   We were speechless, bewildered and didn’t understand what was
happening or even where we were. The escorts stared at Antoshchenko with
a look of tense anger. Only the two battalion commanders stood calmly by
and looked at us with bored expressions. Apparently, they were used to
such displays.
   Antoshchenko hopped back a few steps and called out in an affectedly
cheerful tone: ‘Well now, who here can read and write? Do be so kind as to
step forward three paces.’
   He made an inviting gesture with his sabre, and I was about to step
forward when the escort standing next to me said in a hushed whisper:
‘Stop. Stay where you are.’
   I stood still. All of us were literate, but many of the conscripts suspected
something nefarious in Antoshchenko’s voice, and so in the end only a
dozen or so men came forward. Antoshchenko didn’t seem the least bit
surprised.
   ‘And which of you are musicians?’ he asked in the same phony tone.
Again, the escort whispered: ‘Don’t move.’ Next, Antoshchenko, joking
and laughing, called out for cobblers, singers and tailors. The conscripts
relaxed and a great many of them stepped out of rank. By now only a dozen
of us useless ignoramuses were left – evidently, only those whom the
escorts had managed to warn. Antoshchenko turned to one of the battalion
officers and said in a tired voice: ‘Commander, look at these shirkers – all
wanting to be clerks at HQ or mend soldiers’ trousers instead of dying a
hero’s death fighting for the oppressed peasants of the world. Do you see
these bastard intelligènty trying to find some nice safe perch for themselves,
even though they don’t have any right to it?’
   ‘I see them, Comrade Commander,’ said the officer wearily.
   ‘Send them all off today against Zelëny’s men near Tripolie. And if a
single one of them comes back alive, you’ll pay for it with your head.
Understand?’
   ‘Yes, sir, Comrade Commander,’ the officer said just as wearily.
   Antoshchenko gave us illiterates a quick look, popped his sabre back into
the sheath and said: ‘I’d better not lay eyes on this rubbish again. Off to the
kitchen patrol! For Christ’s sake, forward march, now, all of you!’
   We were separated from the other men and marched over to the
regimental barracks in the Nikolsky Fortress. A large semicircle surrounded
by slopes overgrown with elder, the fortress stood on a bluff overlooking
the Dnieper not far from Mariinsky Park. As a boy, I had spent a good deal
of time, especially in spring, in this shady and empty park. I had once seen
a midshipman there and this encounter had awoken a passion in me for the
sea. There, to the humming of the bees in the jasmine bushes, I exhausted
myself in reading and rereading my favourite poets, reciting aloud those
especially wonderful lines I couldn’t get out of my head. This is why the
grey-brick fortress, with its embrasures, its archways, its decrepit
drawbridge hanging from rusty chains, its bronze lion heads on the cast-iron
gates, had always seemed to me to be one of the most romantic places on
earth.
   The fort was deserted, neglected. Tall grass grew on the parade ground.
Swallows nested under the eaves. The warm, drowsy smell of summer
leaves drifted through the broken windows. The fort had never been
besieged. It had stood for many years as little more than a peaceful
architectural folly. This impression of the fort was so deeply ingrained in
me that I was actually happy to be serving within its walls. But my naïve
illusions were scattered like dust within minutes. Inside, the fortress was
dirty and grim. The mildewed walls were covered with obscene graffiti and
shook from the tramp of boots along with the noise of curses, blasphemies
and songs. The barrack stench was so strong that it immediately settled into
my clothes and never left.
   They lined us up in a dusty corridor with a rough plank floor. The head of
the kitchen patrol, a pale, effeminate-looking man, most likely a former
officer, approached. He gave us a sympathetic look, tapped his boot with a
riding crop and said: ‘Well, men, so you’ve met the mad dog? Murder
would be too good for a commander like that.’
   We couldn’t tell whether he was being sincere or trying to provoke us. To
be safe, no one said a word.
   ‘Ah, all right then, you scum,’ he said. ‘March! Down to the cellar – start
peeling potatoes!’
   We sat peeling rotten, wet potatoes in a cold underground vault until
evening. Water dripped from the walls. Rats scurried in the dark corners. A
narrow slit high up in the wall provided the only light. Our hands were
numb from the cold, slippery potatoes. We talked among ourselves in
hushed voices. I learned that the man next to me – a meek little man in
spectacles with sad, red eyes – had been a worker in a razor factory in Lodz
before the war. His name was Iosif Morgenstern.
   We returned to the barracks that night. I lay down on my plank bed and
fell straight to sleep. I was awakened in the night by the hollow beat of
horses’ hooves. I opened my eyes. A dim electric bulb burned at the end of
a long flex hanging from the ceiling. All around me the other men lay
snoring. The cheap clock on the wall showed three. In the muddy yellow
light of the bulb, I saw Antoshchenko. He was riding a heavy bay down the
vaulted corridor. The flagstones rang under the horse’s shoes. The flex of a
field telephone had been strung across the corridor and kept him from going
any farther. He stopped his horse, drew his sword and slashed it in two. He
rode on out of the corridor and into our barracks room. He pulled up and
shouted: ‘Fatigue squad, fall in!’
   Startled, sleepy men jumped from their beds and hastily lined up. Nearly
all barefoot, they stood there on the stone floor, groggy and shivering.
Antoshchenko began in a calm voice: ‘At this very moment I’m having a
machine-gunner brought over and am going to order him to shoot every last
one of you, like so many quail. Do you think I don’t know that you’ve been
planning to kill me, your commander, and that you dare to call me a mad
dog?!’ Notes of hysteria quivered in his voice. ‘Fetch the machine-gunner!’
he yelled, turning. Only then did we see his two orderlies standing in the
doorway. ‘Where the hell’s he disappeared to, the bastard?’
   ‘Comrade Commander,’ one of the orderlies said nervously. ‘We really
should head back.’
   ‘I’ll kill you!’ Antoshchenko screamed wildly. He was swaying back and
forth in his saddle. ‘I’ll cut you into strips, you bespectacled little Jews! I’ll
slice you up with a saw like mutton!’
   He started choking. Foam poured from his mouth, he pitched forward in
his saddle and then he fell to the floor. We stood motionless. We later
discovered that the same thought came to each of us at that instant – if
Antoshchenko really did call for the gunner, then we’d rush to the corner
where the rifles were kept, grab them and open fire.
   The orderlies grabbed Antoshchenko and helped him up and into the
corridor, and from there out into the yard and the fresh air. His horse,
indifferent to what had just happened, followed a few paces behind. None
of us, soldiers of the kitchen patrol, men who had ended up in this regiment
by pure chance, could understand how it was possible that here in Kiev, a
stone’s throw from Kreshchatik, from the theatres and university, the
libraries and symphony concerts, not to mention the good everyday citizens
of the city, such a sinister den of bandits and its sick, half-mad commander
could exist. This regiment’s very existence seemed like a phantasmagorical
nightmare. At any moment Antoshchenko could shoot any one of us. Our
lives depended on whatever crazed idea he might think up next. We lived
from day to day in fear of some new madness, and he never disappointed
us.
   We never left the Nikolsky Fortress. Not once were we permitted into the
city. Even if we had been, there was no one we could talk to about what was
happening with our regiment. And it would have been pointless anyway –
no one would have believed us. We decided to write a letter about
Antoshchenko to the government and Commissar of War Podvoisky, but
events overtook us.
   Several days passed in relative calm. Part of the regiment had been sent
to Tripolie against Zelëny’s forces, and the remaining companies were
placed on guard duty in Kiev, protecting warehouses and the goods station,
taking part in raids against speculators at the Bessarabsky Market and near
the famous Café Semadeni on Kreshchatik. And then, late one night, we
were roused by an alarm signal and lined up in a large square on the parade
ground in front of the fortress. No one knew what was happening. There
was talk of some unknown gang approaching from Svyatoshino and that we
were going to be sent to hold them back from entering the city. The light air
of excitement among the soldiers somehow found its way to us in the
fatigue squad, even though we had not been issued with a single bullet for
our Japanese rifles.
   We stood and waited on the parade ground. A rainy dawn was breaking
through the clouds beyond the Dnieper. The chestnut trees had released
their broad green leaves, which hung down like fingers. There was the
smell of dusty grass, and the bells of the Pechersk Monastery struck the
useless hour of four o’clock.
   ‘Company, attention!’ the officers shouted. The men drew themselves up
and froze. A gleaming black landau drove swiftly into the centre of the
square. Two Orlov trotters, dappled greys, stopped and began to paw the
ground. Antoshchenko was standing in the landau together with three young
women in large hats. They were playfully elbowing each other, giggling and
squealing with joy.
   ‘Regiment, listen!’ a drunken Antoshchenko shouted, raising his sabre
over his head. ‘Gather round the carriage . . . by platoons . . . singing my
favourite song . . . in a slow, ceremonial march . . . Let’s go . . . March!’
   He dropped his sabre. The regiment remained in place. Only the First
Company, made up of Makhno’s men, took a few tentative steps forward
towards the landau. The song leaders launched into ‘Don’t you cry,
Marusya, you’ll be mine,’ but quickly stopped, and the company, now
completely confused, came to a disorganised halt.
   ‘March!’ Antoshchenko screamed wildly. The regiment remained
motionless. No one said a word. The women stopped giggling. It was so
quiet we could hear Antoshchenko’s angry, uneven breathing.
   ‘Ah, so that’s how it is, you sons of bitches,’ Antoshchenko wheezed and
pulled his Mauser from the holster. That very instant came a cry from the
back row: ‘Trying to impress his silly bimbos, the dog! At him, boys! Kill
him!’
   A shot rang out. Antoshchenko’s coachman pulled the horses round so
sharply they reared, and then bolted out of the parade ground and down the
street along the slope of Mariinsky Park. They were chased by several rifle
shots. Then the regiment broke rank. The men began cursing and yelling
wildly. Makhno’s First Company was driven up against a wall. The men
fought back with their rifle butts. Amid all this noise, piercing two-fingered
bandit whistles rang out and seemed to hover in the air over everything –
the parade ground, the fortress and even Kiev itself.
   ‘Back to the barracks! Quiet!’ shouted the commanders, although by now
no one paid them any attention. The regiment had mutinied.
   Makhno’s men were being beaten because they were Antoshchenko’s
favourite company. They had retreated to the ground floor of the fortress
and begun shooting from the windows. Cooks and orderlies were being
beaten up left and right. It was hard to make out what was happening. The
frenzied melee spread from the parade ground to the stairwells and the
guardrooms. Fortunately, our fatigue guard had escaped notice, and so we
quietly walked back to our barracks and barricaded ourselves inside.
   The mutiny ended two hours later after the fortress was surrounded by
the International Regiment, composed of Hungarian and Austrian prisoners
of war stationed nearby. Amazingly, no one had been killed, although there
were a good many wounded.
   We were called back to the parade ground by the signal alarm the next
morning at eleven o’clock. The men were angry, cursing and grumbling as
they reluctantly fell in. Officers informed the regiment that members of the
government were on their way to speak to the soldiers and get to the bottom
of what had just happened. A collective sigh of relief swept through the
ranks.
   A wooden platform had been erected in the centre of the square. Before
long, cars bearing members of the government, led by Rakovsky, drove up.
The regiment presented arms. The band struck up ‘The Internationale’.
Looking at the columns of soldiers standing at attention, no one could have
believed that only a few hours earlier the regiment had been in a state of
rebellion. The only clue was the bandages covering up the wounds and
bruises on some of the men’s heads.
   Antoshchenko had climbed unobtrusively onto the platform. He didn’t
acknowledge the regiment. Instead, he went over to the government
delegates and tried to engage them in conversation but was studiously
ignored. Rakovsky was the first to speak. He spoke softly, kindly, and tried
to reassure the soldiers, telling them that a special government commission
had been set up to investigate the complaints against the commander. A
decision would be forthcoming in three days, and should the complaints be
found justified, the most decisive of measures would be taken against the
regimental commander.
   Antoshchenko was standing behind Rakovsky. Blood filled his face. One
of his cheeks, marked by a crimson scar, twitched. His hand repeatedly
clenched, then unclenched on the hilt of his sword. At last, he could stand it
no longer. Antoshchenko pushed Rakovsky out of the way and started
shouting: ‘Just what are you thinking, Comrade Rakovsky, talking to these
bloodthirsty louts like a bunch of schoolboys? The government may lick
your boots, comrade, but I don’t intend to. I’ve had more than enough of
this shit, and I’ll talk to you all as I see fit. First of all, how dare you sons of
bitches complain to our most beloved government about me, your
commander, your father, in fact? Who put such an idea in your thick skulls?
Complain? No, you ought to kiss my hands. Who was it who turned you
cut-throats into men? I did, Antoshchenko! Who put shoes on your feet and
clothes on your back? Again, I did, Antoshchenko! Who feeds you buttered
porridge and makes sure you get your full tobacco ration? That very same
commander, Comrade Antoshchenko. If it weren’t for me, you’d all have
been shot long ago, so many fish in a barrel, I swear to it on the life of my
poor dead father, that fine cobbler from Khristinovka. And you dare to
complain! And to mutiny! Scum! You there, with the red face – three steps
forward, march! No, not you, the one over there, in the Austrian greatcoat.
Just who issued that to you, huh? Answer!’
   The soldier in the Austrian coat stepped forward three paces and stood at
attention but didn’t say a word.
   ‘I gave you everything. I did . . . I, you snub-nosed fool! Just who was it
who gave you puttees of blue wool, of the finest English fabric? Don’t
know, eh? Well, damn your eyes! I gave them to you, against all the
regulations, I, Commander Antoshchenko, gave you puttees meant only for
officers. I took pity on you vermin. What are you goggling for? Can’t you
speak? And another thing! You dare to complain about your commander,
meanwhile you brave boys have been selling government bread on the sly
to the monks at Pechersk. Did you really think I wouldn’t find out? And
who’s been flogging soldiers’ coats at the Zhitny Market? And who stripped
those trollops over on Vladimirskaya Hill and sent them off to walk naked
through the streets of Russia’s mother city? I know everything. I’ve got you
all right here,’ at this point Antoshchenko began clenching and unclenching
his red-leather fist. ‘I could execute any one of you at any moment.’
    His adjutant tried to stop him, but Antoshchenko paid him no attention.
‘Brewing hooch all over the barracks, making coils out of gas-masks.
Wasting bullets for the fun of it, for your ridiculous crimes, while there’s a
shortage of them at the front where soldiers are waging a war against the
free Ukrainian atamans!
    ‘All right then, you see what I mean. Enough’s enough. Speaking here
before representatives of the government, I forgive you. I don’t give a fig
for any of you, but I won’t say that I harbour any hatred in my heart. What
can I expect from a lot of oafs like you anyway? And so, men, listen!’
    Antoshchenko pulled his bent sabre out of its sheath. The blade flashed
like sparkling water in the raw morning air.
    ‘All right now! Beginning with the companies to my right, on my count
. . . forward march! Past the platform . . . all together now, sing!’
    The band struck up a rollicking tune, and the regiment marched clumsily
past the platform. The First Company broke into song:

       A puffed-up cock
       Went out for a walk,
       They caught him, they jailed him,
       Not even his passport could save him.

   The government representatives, not waiting for the end of the song,
quickly descended from the platform and drove off. The entire regiment
wondered what would happen next. We were all certain that Antoshchenko
would be relieved of command and cashiered. But the days passed and
nothing happened. It became obvious that the government didn’t have time
to worry about Antoshchenko. Denikin had taken Odessa. The situation was
grave.
   Antoshchenko continued to strut about and bullied the regiment more
than he had before the notorious mutiny. The difficult, turbulent existence
of our regiment was brought to an end by a soldier in our company – that
very same meek little Iosif Morgenstern I mentioned earlier. Although
gentle and long-suffering, Morgenstern hated Antoshchenko with a wild,
raging passion, especially after the commander vowed to ‘carve up’ all the
Jews in the regiment and get rid of what he called its ‘Jerusalem Gentry’.
One night, against regulations, our company was ordered to guard a
warehouse out beyond the Baikovoe Cemetery. Amazingly, each of us was
issued with two cartridges for our rifles. It was warm. The air was filled
with the smell of flowering stocks. A waning crescent moon rose over
darkened Kiev and traversed the still Ukrainian sky. To keep from falling
asleep, I sang bits of songs to myself –

       The sounds of the city have died completely,
       Beyond the Neva tower, there’s silence in the gloom,
       And on the bayonet of the lone sentry,
       Bright flashes sparked by the midnight moon.2

   As I was singing this old tune there came the sound of a horse’s hooves.
Someone had ridden up to the warehouse and hopped down from the
saddle. I could hear him cursing. I recognised Antoshchenko’s voice.
Sometimes he rode out at night to inspect the guards. Antoshchenko walked
over to the warehouse. Morgenstern stood watch at the doors. ‘Who goes
there?’ he called out in his soft little voice.
   ‘What the hell’s wrong with you, damned fool!’ yelled Antoshchenko.
‘Can’t you see who it is?’
   Morgenstern now realised perfectly well who it was. Nevertheless, he
followed regulations and shouted, ‘Who goes there?’ three times in quick
succession. Without giving Antoshchenko a chance to answer, Morgenstern
fired at him from point-blank range. Antoshchenko was killed instantly.
Morgenstern was arrested and then released the next day. Our regiment was
immediately disbanded, and we were sent home.
   It was late in the evening as I made my way along Institutskaya Street
past the State Bank, built by an eccentric architect in the style of the Doge’s
Palace in Venice. It was humid, a storm was approaching, lightning
reflected off the polished black pillars of the bank. A fresh breeze blew
through the chestnut trees and then died. Through an open window in the
dark I could hear someone playing the piano and a baritone voice singing:
‘He’s far away, he won’t know, he’ll never care about your grief.’ The smell
of grass came from the front gardens.
   All of a sudden, I recalled that night of my graduation ball marking the
end of my gymnasium years when I had accompanied Olga Bogushevich
along this same street under these same chestnut trees. Her dress had
seemed too formal even for that festive night, but still she was all beauty
and joy. I recalled that night, her hands, cold with nervous excitement as we
said goodbye outside her house, her eyes sparkling in the lamplight. All of
it seemed to me now like an impossible dream from centuries ago. I
couldn’t believe that in the same world as this summer lightning and
chestnut trees, in this simple, decent world of fresh grass and soft voices, of
a young girl’s tender trembling, of books, poetry and secret hopes, there
could also exist a monster like Antoshchenko, this raving, bloodthirsty
madman, this ‘fiend from hell’, as Morgenstern called him. I couldn’t help
thinking how thin was the veneer of civilisation that separated us from a
bottomless sea of dark savagery. I wanted to believe that human reason
would penetrate these waters, and I knew this was going to be the great
challenge of our future and of our still unsettled lives.

                                       •

More than twenty years later, I was asked to give a talk at the main library
in the city of Alma-Ata. The stiff, dry leaves of the poplars crackled in the
late autumn wind. Irrigation canals carried icy water which smelled of the
sea down from the mountains. A deep blue sky sparkled over the Alatau,
beyond whose peaks one could imagine far-off India.
   After my talk, a small, completely white-haired man with sad eyes
approached me. ‘You don’t recognise me, do you?’ he asked.
   ‘No, I’m afraid not.’
   ‘I’m Morgenstern. We served in the fatigue regiment together in Kiev.’
   ‘What are you doing now?’ I asked.
   ‘It doesn’t matter,’ he said and smiled. ‘But I’m happy for you. You’ve
got to speak up for all of us in your writing, to give voice to everyone
you’ve ever met. That includes me too, Morgenstern, your old comrade in
arms.’


1 The All-Russian Extraordinary Commission for Combatting Counter-
Revolution and Sabotage (known by the abbreviation Cheka), the Soviet
secret police, forerunner of the KGB.
2From ‘A Prisoner’s Song’ (1826) by Fëdor Glinka, set to music by Nikolai
Devitte (1811–44).
OceanofPDF.com
84
Puff Pastry



It was a gusty summer morning. The chestnut trees outside my windows
thrashed about in a confused way, and cannons boomed off in the distance
from the direction of Fastov. A battle was being fought there against
Denikin’s forces advancing from the south.
   Amalia’s dark flat smelled of fresh coffee. She was grinding the last of
her precious beans. The coffee mill creaked unhappily, even screeching at
times, as though it sensed its imminent doom. As always, the smell of
coffee made the flat seem cosier, despite the ‘Gift of the Sea’ – a broken
wall-mounted thermometer decorated with cockle shells that read three
degrees below zero both winter and summer. Those everlasting minus three
degrees sometimes made the flat feel colder than it was.
   Someone knocked at the kitchen door. I heard Amalia go over to open it.
There was a moment of silence, and then she cried out with excitement:
‘Yes, he’s here! He’s here, of course!’ Her voice broke. I dashed into the
kitchen. Two beggar women covered in dust were standing there. Their
heads were covered with kerchiefs that had been pulled down so low you
could barely see their eyes.
   ‘Kostik!’ the shorter of the two cried. She sank onto a stool and her head
dropped to the kitchen table. A homemade hazel staff fell from her hand
and clattered to the floor. I recognised Mama’s voice, knelt before her, and
tried to look into her face. She avoided my eyes, but squeezed my cheeks
with her cold, thin hands and began to sob, almost without tears. Only her
convulsive breathing told me she was crying. Galya stood there, too afraid
to move – it seemed that she had lost the last bit of her sight. I noticed that
her legs were wrapped in strips torn from an old twilled cotton bedspread
and tied on with twine. Even now I still remember those strips with their
distinctive green pattern. Galya was not wearing spectacles. She was
straining her neck forward, trying to make out the bent-wood coat rack in a
dark corner of the kitchen, and kept asking Mama: ‘Well, is he here? Is
Kostik here? Why aren’t you answering? Where is he?’
   Mama and Galya had walked all the way from Kopan to Kiev. It had
become impossible for them to stay there any longer. Small gangs raided
the farm almost daily, although they had apparently not harmed either of the
women since they were too poor to rob. Some had even taken pity on them
and left Mama a handful of rusks or the crushed hulls of sunflower seeds.
One bandit even gave Mama an exquisite though utterly moth-eaten
Spanish shawl. He told her he had stolen it from a theatre in Zhitomir.
   The last straw for Mama had been a bandit known as the ‘Angel of
Vengeance’. Having already seen dozens of atamans, Mama was staggered
to find that this Angel of Vengeance was a converted Jew with a full beard
and spectacles who had once run a chemist’s shop in Radomyshl and
regarded himself as a committed anarchist. He addressed her as ‘madame’
and proceeded to take every last thing she owned, right down to her sewing
needles, although he was kind enough to leave her a detailed inventory of
what he had stolen so that Mama could claim compensation, but only after
‘anarchy had swept over the entire world’.
   It had taken Mama and Galya over two weeks to walk all the way to
Kiev. They had adopted the disguise of beggars, which they in fact were.
Galya had walked behind Mama, holding onto her shoulder. She didn’t
wear her glasses, for that would have given them away: beggars were too
poor for glasses. Moreover, in those violent, turbulent times, people in
spectacles encountered widespread suspicion and even hatred. It was
generally believed that anyone who wore glasses must be an enemy of the
masses. Amazingly, some of this mistrust of men and women in glasses,
which casts them as wily, devious and untrustworthy characters, remains
today.
   For several days Mama and Galya did nothing but rest and catch up on
their sleep. A look of peace and happiness never left their faces. But then,
as always, Mama decided it was time to act, and she began by helping
Amalia with her sewing. They became fast friends, and now two sewing
machines whirred away in the flat, while Galya busied herself making
artificial flowers. She made them out of scraps of coloured material,
working slowly and carefully. I was impressed by her array of steel tools
and stamps. She used them to cut stiff calico into daisy chains, rose petals
and leaves of various shapes. The buds and stamens were particularly
difficult to make. Her flowers were pretty, but they smelled of paint and
glue and very quickly gathered dust. Deep down I was convinced that
Galya’s work was utterly pointless, especially during a time of revolution,
famine and civil war. Who would want to buy these flowers when food was
so scarce that people were risking their lives on long, dangerous trips to the
countryside just for the sake of a pound of barley or a cup of sunflower oil?
As it turned out, however, I was wrong.
   Cloth flowers sold well in the little shops around the Baikovoe Cemetery,
along with cheap wreaths, grave railings (chiefly made from old bed
springs), sugary marble monuments and curly iron crosses. Once a week an
old woman who supplied the shops came to buy Galya’s flowers. She liked
to encourage Galya not to waste too much time finishing them off because
they would sell out no matter what for the simple reason she had no
competitors. Her words made Galya indignant, and she carried on fussing
over every last tea-rose for an entire day trying to make it perfect. She was
conscientious to the point of self-torture.
   The old woman, something of a born philosophiser, had a rather gloomy
theory about trades and occupations, which she loved to expound in her
monotonous voice: ‘In times like these, you’ve got to earn a living from
things that have always been, are, and will continue to be on this earth,
regardless of all these wars and revolutions. Take hair, for example. As long
as the earth keeps turning, hair will keep growing. And, mind you, just as
the earth spins day and night, hair grows day and night too. Given that fact,
I propose that the most profitable occupation has to be that of a hairdresser.
   ‘After hair, there’s death. We’ll never stop dying. And no matter who’s in
power, dead folks have to be buried. A corpse can’t dig its own grave, put a
wreath on it, or write on its tombstone “Rest in Peace, My Beloved
Husband Yasha” or “He Died a Hero’s Death Fighting the Enemy”. Death
will always provide a way to make a few kopecks. That’s just the way it is.
One man’s grief is another man’s bread. One man’s tears are another man’s
pitcher of milk.’
   We were all terrified of this sinister graveyard crone. All of us, that is,
except for Galya, who alone had the courage to engage her in pointless
arguments.

                                      •
The rumble of the cannons to the south grew louder. Soviet units were by
now fighting Denikin’s forces at the approaches to the city. The calico outfit
to which I had returned after the fatigue regiment had begun to evacuate.
The bales of calico were being moved to the goods station and sent north.
   One morning I arrived at work and found a notice pinned to the door. I
knew the typewriter well – it was missing its R – and so the notice read:
‘Oganisation Evacuated. Fo Futhe Infomation Dial . . .’ I waited in the dark
stairwell strewn with scraps of sacking in the hope one of my colleagues
would turn up, but no one did. Puzzled, I went back outside and came upon
about twenty wounded Red Army soldiers. Dirty and exhausted, they were
tramping wearily along the pavement. Fresh bandages, as white as snow,
covered the men’s arms and faces. I followed them. It was obvious they had
made their way into the city on foot straight from battle.
   They walked along the noisy Vasilkovskaya Street, then the equally loud
but smarter Kreshchatik, before descending to Podol towards the Dnieper.
As they walked, the noise slowly died down, and they were left to their own
silence. Passers-by stopped to stare. The sight of the wounded Red Army
men making their way down Kreshchatik awoke panic that quickly spread
to the side streets. I caught up with one of the soldiers and asked him where
they had been fighting.
   ‘Near the Red Tavern,’ he said without bothering to look at me. ‘It’s
pretty hot over there now, comrade.’
   Denikin’s forces had attacked from the south-east, from the direction of
Darnitsa, yet the Red Tavern was over to the south-west of Kiev.
   ‘Have Denikin’s men really encircled the city? Are there that many of
them?’ people asked from the crowd.
   ‘What are you talkin’ about, Denikin’s men!’ the soldier said angrily.
‘They’re nowhere near there.’
   ‘Then who were you fighting?’
   ‘Well, the enemy, of course,’ he said, grinning, and then walked off to
catch up with the others.
   None of this made sense. And when, an hour later, shells began flying
overhead with the now familiar screech and exploding in the Podol
neighbourhood and on the wharfs, complete panic gripped the inhabitants of
Kiev. Once more, everyone took shelter in their cellars. Once more, night
patrols were organised in the courtyards, oil lamps went out with each
explosion, water was hurriedly stored in every possible container, rumours
spread, people lay awake at night unable to sleep.
   Night watch was perhaps the calmest of occupations during this violent
time. I actually loved my shift on duty in our nice little courtyard beside the
solid wicket set into the equally solid iron gate. For some reason the
closeness of the yard at night and its lone chestnut tree made me feel as safe
as in an impregnable fortress. There was no thought of carrying a weapon –
you could be shot on the spot just for holding a child’s popgun. The only
thing we watchmen were expected to do was to raise the alarm at the first
sign of danger so the house residents wouldn’t be caught unawares. For this,
we were given a large copper bowl and a hammer.
   I am sure the reason I loved night duty was the strange and completely
illusory feeling of safety it gave me, a feeling that owed much to the danger
all around. Danger was lying in wait right there, just on the other side of
that iron wicket no more than two millimetres thick. Just open the wicket
and cross the threshold, and you were face to face with the terrifying
unknown that stalked the dark, dead streets of the city at night. Cross the
threshold and you could hear someone sneaking through the garden and
sense with every single nerve in your body the vibrating air as the lead
bullet flew straight at your heart.
   Inside the courtyard that fear disappeared. All you had to do not to give
yourself away was to sit still and listen. Animal instinct told you that your
only chance for survival was to remain invisible, cloaked by darkness and
silence. I sometimes shared my watch with Avel Isidorovich Stakover, a
former history teacher at the Levandovskaya Gymnasium for Girls. Despite
the fact that Stakover had taught at a girls’ school, he was a terrible
misogynist. A small man with a scraggy beard and bloodshot eyes, slovenly
and always enraged, he never grew tired of calling down curses, like some
Prophet Jeremiah, on the head of every last woman without exception.
   There was only one subject he could discuss in a calm, relaxed manner –
the Middle Ages. He insisted that this was the loveliest age in the history of
humanity. Stakover had his reasons for this, accepting, of course, one
excluded the era’s embrace of chivalry, courtly love and the whole cult of
the Virgin Mary. Everything else, however, suited him just fine. He liked to
tick off the merits of the Middle Ages on his fingers. First, the earth wasn’t
so crowded. Second, dense forests, brooks, streams and rivers came right up
to your doorstep. You lived on the life-giving air of the woods and the pure
fruits of the earth, not on paraffin and tins. Third, great poetry had already
flourished, and the life of the mind did not take a back seat to today. And
fourth, people were simpler, less homogenised, and so more attractive than
at the height of civilisation.
   Stakover did not miss an opportunity to try to convince me of the beauty
of the Middle Ages. It was almost as though he thought he could easily
transport me back to that distant time and that I had some sort of real choice
about which epoch I might care to live in. He talked like a recruiting agent,
like a zealous disciple, like an official representative of those Middle Ages
from which he had just returned. Stakover even used the civil war in
Ukraine and our shared night watch to sing the praises of the Middle Ages.
On the night the Red Army units abandoned Kiev, shelled by an unknown
enemy on the other side of the city as they went, he said to me: ‘I don’t
know about you, my young friend, but I would like to live in a medieval
castle. Only there did one enjoy blessed peace and safety in those dangerous
times. Leaving the forest, where with every step one risked being snatched
and hanged from the nearest oak, one entered the ancient shelter of the
crenellated walls. Up went the drawbridge, the fortress gate was locked, and
every man, woman and child felt not only the joy of escape but the full
richness of life itself. It filled the air, it sparkled with the sunlit silence of
the enormous flagstone courts, it rang in the music of the horn summoning
them to the banqueting hall, and it was preserved in the heavy folios of the
library, where the wind stirred the thick pages. And it is only in such a state,
my young friend, that anything of immortal value can be created.’
   In the daytime, Stakover showed me plans and drawings of old castles,
with their massive towers, dungeons, embrasures, turrets, passageways,
gloomy labyrinths, walls two metres thick, fireplaces, inner gardens and
wells. All the castles stood on the tops of mountains or clung to
impregnable rocky faces. The winds of Burgundy and the Île-de-France, of
Lotharingia and Savoy, Bohemia and the Apennines buffeted them from all
sides. The sun, like a burning crown, cast its rays over the towers, banners
and moss-grown slates.
   Mama especially loved to listen to Stakover. When I was on duty, she got
up at night, threw on a heavy shawl and came into the yard. We would sit in
a nook sheltered from the wind and talk in a whisper, often stopping to
listen to some unfamiliar sound. Like all mothers, Mama still thought of
Galya and me as little children and encouraged me in her good-natured way
to see more of Stakover. ‘He’s a fount of knowledge,’ Mama liked to say.
‘A walking encyclopedia. It would be good for you to spend more time with
him, Kostik. Don’t look down on people like that.’
   She was wrong. I never did look down on people like that. Just the
opposite. I could listen to them for hours. I was impressed by their vast
knowledge and grateful for their generosity in sharing it with me. What
astonished me was that they, in their turn, were grateful to me for listening
to them so attentively. They had evidently not been spoiled by too much
attention, and I could explain this only by the fact that, as Pushkin said, we
Russians ‘are lazy and incurious’. Neither gymnasium nor university taught
me so much, or so thoroughly, as the books I’ve read and the people I’ve
met. Being extremely shy, I have always envied people who feel
comfortable in any surroundings and can easily strike up conversations with
strangers. This is something that has always been difficult for me to do.

                                        •

Shells whistled over the city all night long. The explosions coming from
Podol sounded as though someone were dropping large bundles of sheet
metal. By dawn the Soviet forces had retreated to the north along the
Dnieper, and everything was quiet again. Early that morning, Mama, who
had been blessed with extraordinary inquisitiveness and a complete
disregard for her safety, went out into the city, as she put it, ‘to reconnoitre’.
She came back soon to say that the city was deserted and even though there
was still no sign of Denikin’s troops, some of the city’s more cautious
residents had already hung out white, blue and red tsarist flags.
   Drinking our carrot tea later in the kitchen, we heard the familiar cries of
‘Glory!’ coming from Fundukleevskaya Street. We went out to the balcony.
The soldiers marching down the street holding blue and yellow banners
were not Denikin’s but Petlyura’s. They marched slowly and confidently,
full of pride in their Austrian uniforms. And the same old ‘proper’
Ukrainians we had grown so tired of seeing a short while ago were now
back out in the streets in their embroidered shirts screaming ‘Glory!’ and
tossing their moth-eaten lambskin hats in the air. The city was puzzled.
Why Petlyura and not Denikin?
   The soldiers marched to Kreshchatik, occupied it, spread their bivouac
and hung their flag from the balcony of the City Duma. Hanging one’s flag
from that balcony was a declaration of sorts. Every new occupier did it as a
way of saying they would not surrender without a fight. Rumours quickly
began to spread that Denikin had ceded Kiev to Petlyura and redirected his
White Army, which had been advancing on the city from the south, towards
Orël. Driven nearly mad by the ceaseless coups and overthrows, the
population hardly cared who controlled the city, as long as the new rulers
stopped shooting, looting and throwing people out of their homes. For this
reason, the arrival of Petlyura was met with complete indifference.
   And then, at one o’clock, advance cavalry units of Denikin’s army,
followed by a regiment of Don Cossacks, entered the city from the direction
of Pechersk, not far from the monastery. Denikin’s forces advanced to
Kreshchatik, only to find it already occupied by Petlyura’s men, a state of
affairs they found as shocking as had the residents a short while ago and
that they tried to get to the bottom of. It turned out that one of Petlyura’s
divisions had been hiding in the villages to the west of Kiev and biding its
time. No one had known anything about this. Taking advantage of the
Soviet retreat, the division had decided to beat Denikin to the prize – the
soldiers launched an attack on Kiev and after a two-day battle they
occupied the city.
   Quite naturally, Denikin’s men were not pleased. Mysterious and
complicated talks began between the two sides, after which a white, blue
and red flag appeared on the Duma balcony alongside that of Petlyura’s as a
sign of dual sovereignty. The residents were now completely bewildered. It
was impossible to know who exactly was in charge.
   All doubts on the matter were settled that evening when reinforcements
from Denikin’s army moved in. Two more Cossack regiments suddenly
poured like lava down the steep Pechersk hills onto Petlyura’s unsuspecting
troops. Galloping at full-tilt, lances levelled, swords flashing, the Cossacks
roared forth, whooping and shooting their guns in the air. The steeliest of
nerves could not have withstood this savage and sudden attack. Petlyura’s
men dropped their weapons, abandoned their cannons and fled without a
shot. And the same old ‘proper’ Ukrainians who had been shouting ‘Glory!’
so movingly only that morning were now out on the streets and the
balconies, shaking their fists and screaming ‘Ganba!’ – ‘Shame! Disgrace!’
But the soldiers paid them no attention. They were running as fast as they
could, looking back now and then in terror and hurriedly shoving things
into their pockets. It wasn’t until they reached Svyatoshino outside the city
that they stopped to catch their breath. Their last remaining battery lobbed a
dozen or so shells in the general direction of Kiev, but that was it. There
were no casualties, unless you count a wrecked ice-cream stand on
Vladimirskaya Hill and the loss of an ear from the plaster statue of one of
those two great Enlighteners of Russia, either St Cyril or St Methodius, I
can’t recall which.
   The following morning, an order signed by General Bredov had been
posted around the city, announcing that from that day on, Kiev would
forever remain a part of a united and indivisible Russia.

                             OceanofPDF.com
85
A Cry in the Night



It must have been at that late hour when everything succumbs to silence
and the miry darkness. Even the water in the rusty pipes ran dry in the
middle of the night and stopped its rhythmic drip from the tap in the
kitchen. It was one of those torpid nights that breed troubled dreams and
leave a vague sense of disquiet.
   Someone had been trying to rouse me for a long time, but I could not
wake up. In fact, I didn’t want to wake up and kept trying to hold onto a
vanishing glimmer of light in my befuddled mind. Then, in a sudden flash,
the sound of crying broke through this tense struggle. I opened my eyes,
quickly sat up and saw Mama. She was sitting at the foot of my bed. Grey,
dishevelled hair fell over her face. Clutching the bed rail, she sobbed
silently, her shoulders shaking.
   ‘What is it?’ I whispered. ‘What’s the matter?’
   ‘Quiet,’ Mama said, choking back her tears. ‘You’ll wake Galya.’
   ‘What’s happened? Tell me.’
   ‘I don’t know,’ Mama said in a confused voice. Her head was trembling.
I thought she might be losing her mind. ‘I don’t know what’s happened, but
clearly it’s something terrible. Get up and listen. Go to the balcony.’
   I got up and slowly groped my way across the room. The balcony door
was wide open. I went out, listened, and froze. From far off, in the direction
of Vasilkovskaya Street, tumbling violently through the darkened city
towards us, came a collective scream of terror and mass death. No one
individual voice could be discerned amid the confused, horrified wail.
   ‘What is this?’ I said, speaking to the darkness.
   ‘It’s a pogrom,’ Amalia answered unexpectedly from behind me. Her
teeth were chattering. I sensed she was at breaking point and on the verge of
hysteria. I listened again. All I could hear were screams, nothing else. There
was no shooting, no crashing of broken glass, no reddened sky from fires to
suggest a pogrom. Things had been quiet for a time after the horrible
Haidamak pogroms. And it had been quiet when Denikin’s troops first
arrived. The Jews had been left in peace. Only rarely, and then in the empty
back streets away from crowded parts of the city, did gangs of Cadets with
cocaine eyes ride by on prancing horses, singing their favourite song:

       Ride, Black Hussars!
       Save Russia, beat the Yids!
       Kill the Jew Commissars!

   But after Soviet forces pushed Denikin’s army back from Orël and began
to drive it farther to the south, the Whites’ mood changed. Pogroms erupted
in towns and villages all over the countryside. The ring of pogroms closed
around Kiev, until finally they reached Vasilkovskaya Street that night. The
thugs had surrounded one of the large houses but failed to break in. Then,
from the hidden darkness of the house, came a woman’s scream, full of
terror and despair, that tore through the sinister quiet of the night. It was the
only weapon she had with which to defend her children – just this endless,
unbroken wail of fear and helplessness. The whole house, from the cellar to
the attic, responded to the lonely cry of this woman with a mighty roar of its
own, which so overwhelmed the murderous thugs that they turned and ran.
But there was nowhere for them to run to – they were now surrounded by
people crying from all the houses along Vasilkovskaya and the surrounding
streets.
   This cry spread like the wind from district to district. What was so
especially terrifying was that the cry came from dark and what looked like
empty houses and utterly deserted streets, absent of any signs of life other
than a few flickering gas lamps that seemed to light its way. I learned of all
this later. At the time, unsure what was happening, I hurriedly got dressed
and prepared to go and find that place where the heart-rending cry was
coming from. Mama also got dressed. She had decided to come with me.
   I didn’t really know myself why I was going out. I couldn’t stay at home.
I realised that I wouldn’t be able to calm down until I knew what was
causing that cry. Not knowing was worse than the danger that everyone
faced who dared to walk Kiev’s hellish streets at night. In the end, we didn’t
have to leave the building. As we were still dressing, the cry reached the
neighbouring Fundukleevskaya Street and then the three-storey building
next door. Not a window in it was lit. I went back out to the balcony and
saw several men racing down Fundukleevskaya, trying to escape the
shrieking houses. They must have been some of the marauders.
   I was jittery from nerves. Sitting on the floor, rocking from side to side
with her head in her hands, Amalia moaned softly. Mama got her up,
brought her back to her room, and gave her essence of valerian. I listened.
They were screaming in Podol, in Nova Zabudova, in Bessarabka – the
whole city was screaming. The cry must have been heard well outside Kiev.
This cry for mercy and charity rose up, beat against the low, black sky, and
then echoed back to earth.
   The pogrom failed. Denikin’s commanders had never expected such a
reaction. Surprised and embarrassed, they sent in armed detachments to
restore order. All the street lamps were lit. Early in the morning, the
military government posted a reassuring order around the city. That day, the
Kievan published an article under the title ‘Torture by Terror’ by the famous
conservative Vasily Shulgin1 in which he uncharacteristically attacked
Denikin’s High Command for abetting pogroms.
   I had heard people scream from horror before, crowds too, but never an
entire city. It was unbearable, beyond terrifying, because it robbed one of
the habitual, and clearly naïve, assumption of a common human bond
shared by all of us. It was a cry directed at the last remnants of human
conscience. It can’t be denied that the path to justice, freedom and
happiness has been truly terrifying at times. Nothing more than a profound
faith in the victory of light and reason over barbarous stupidity has been
able to save us from complete despair. Such is the power of the human
conscience that it can never be written off for good.
   Recently, a writer friend of mine told me something extraordinary. My
friend grew up in Latvia and speaks the language fluently. Not long after
the end of the war, he took a local commuter train from Riga to the coast.
Opposite him sat a quiet, grim old Latvian man. They fell into conversation,
and the man told my friend this story.
   ‘Listen, I live in a suburb of Riga. Before the war, a man moved into the
house next to mine. He was a bad, dishonest man. I would even say he was
a thoroughly wicked man. He was a black marketeer. You know what
they’re like – no heart, no principles. Some people insist black marketeering
is just another way to make money. But off what? I’d say less off human
greed and more off human sorrow and children’s tears. He worked together
with his wife. So, anyway, when the Germans occupied Riga, they drove all
the Jews into the ghetto. They killed half of them straight away, the other
half they let slowly starve to death. The ghetto was completely cordoned
off. Not even a cat could get out. If you came within fifty paces of the
sentries, they’d shoot you on the spot. Hundreds of Jews were dying in the
ghetto every day. Most of them were children. It was then my neighbour hit
on his bright idea – load a cart with potatoes and drive it into the ghetto.
He’d have to bribe his way in by giving a few to the German sentry, but he
could exchange the rest for the Jews’ gold and jewellery. Word was the
Jews still had loads of valuables on them. And that’s just what he did. I saw
him before he set out on his first trip. You won’t believe what he told me.
“I’m only going to trade the potatoes with women who have children.” I
asked him why. “Because for the sake of feeding their starving children,
they’ll be willing to pay me double.” I said nothing to this, but it still cost
me. Just look.’
   The old Latvian removed his pipe and opened his mouth. Several of his
teeth were missing.
   ‘I said nothing, but bit down so hard on my pipe I broke the stem and
snapped two of my teeth in half. Talk about blood rushing to your head!
Mine rushed this way and that – but mostly to my fists. They became so
heavy all of a sudden that I thought they had turned to iron. And if he
hadn’t left just then, I could very well have killed him with one punch. I
think he sensed it. He jumped back from me and snarled like a hyena. But
that’s beside the point. That night he loaded up his cart with bags of
potatoes and drove off for the ghetto. The sentry stopped him, but as you
can imagine, the two scoundrels understood each other right away. The
sentry took his bribe and then said to the man: “You’re a fool. Go on ahead,
but the only things they’ve got left are empty bellies. You’ll be driving back
home with these same old rotten potatoes. Care to bet on it?”
   ‘Well, he drove his cart into the courtyard of a large house. Women and
children came out and stood around the cart. One woman was holding a
dead boy in one arm and stretched out to him a broken gold watch in the
other. “Are you crazy?” the man screamed at her. “Why do you need
potatoes if he’s already dead? Get out of the way!” He told me later himself
he didn’t know what came over him next. He clenched his teeth, and then
with all his might began tearing open the sacks and letting the potatoes spill
onto the ground. “Hurry!” he yelled at the women. “Give me your children.
I’ll sneak them out. Just tell them not to move a muscle and be as quiet as
mice. Hurry now!” The mothers quickly hid their frightened children in the
sacks and the man tied them up tight. Imagine, it all happened so fast the
mothers didn’t even have time to kiss their children goodbye. And they
knew they’d never see them again. The whole cart was loaded with
children, except for a few sacks with potatoes that he had placed around the
sides. The women kissed the cart’s dirty wheels as he drove off, looking
straight ahead. He yelled loudly at the horses the whole time, fearful one of
the children might make a sound and give them all away, but no one did.
   ‘The same sentry saw him coming and called to him: “Well? Didn’t I say
you were a fool? Now get the hell out of here with your stinkin’ potatoes
before the lieutenant shows up.” So, he drove out of the ghetto past the
sentry, cursing the beggar Jews and their damned children with all his
breath. He didn’t go home but headed off down some empty country lanes
through the woods in the direction of Tukums. Our partisans had gathered
there, and he gave the children to them to hide in a safe place. Back at home
he told his wife that the Germans had taken all the potatoes and held him
prisoner for two days. After the war, he divorced her and moved away from
Riga.’
   The old Latvian paused here. After a while, he smiled for the first time
and said: ‘Now I’m thinking it’s a good thing I didn’t lose my temper and
kill him with that mighty punch of my iron fist.’


1 Vasily Shulgin (1878–1976), prominent nationalist and conservative
politician in the last years of tsarist Russia, publisher, ideologue of the
White Movement.

                             OceanofPDF.com
86
The Wedding Present



The train took eighteen days to get from Kiev to Odessa. I didn’t bother to
count the number of hours, but I remember well how each one of them on
this exhausting trip seemed to us passengers like two. This clearly had
something to do with the fact that every hour contained the danger of death.
Three passengers were indeed killed and a few more wounded by stray
bullets, a number that we all, especially the young priests from the Catholic
seminary in Zhitomir, deemed nothing short of a miracle. It could have been
much worse. The priests were trying to reach Poland by a crazily round-
about route – first to Istanbul, then Thessaloniki, Belgrade and Budapest.
Of course, none of us on the train believed a single one of them would
make it to Poland alive.
   One warm autumn dawn in Kiev, when the Whites still held the line
between Orël and Kursk and we felt quite safe, we were suddenly awakened
by the rattle of machine-gun fire. As always, it was impossible to know
what was happening without a bit of ‘reconnaissance’. Mama was always
the one to reconnoitre. As we rushed to get dressed, still half asleep, she ran
out into the street and soon returned, cheerful and excited. Mama’s bravery
always amazed me. It was largely due to the fact she was a convinced
fatalist and believed that everyone’s life was ruled by inexorable fate. There
was no escaping fate. Everything had been set down at birth.
   She returned with incredible news. Soviet forces had fought their way
into Kiev from the west and advanced as far as the Galitsky Market. The
distance between Kiev and the closest Soviet front was considerable. It was
inconceivable that Soviet troops could have crossed this territory that was
controlled by the Whites. Thus, their appearance in Kiev seemed a miracle,
although an undeniably physical one, as the hail of bullets slamming into
the brick of our much-abused house proved. It turned out that some Soviet
units, which had retreated from the south at the beginning of Denikin’s
advance, had stopped in the vast and nearly impenetrable marshes around
Irpen not far from Kiev. They hid there throughout the summer and autumn,
and no one, neither Denikin’s men nor anyone in Kiev, had any idea. The
only people who did know were the peasants living in the villages
surrounding the marshes, but they didn’t tell a soul.
   And now these units had suddenly burst into Kiev, occupied half the city,
seized a good deal of food and ammunition, and then fought their way back
out and taken off to the north to rejoin the rest of the Soviet army. The
fighting had been fierce, erupting here and there in district after district and
dying down only towards nightfall. The next day we learned that General
Bredov, the commander of Denikin’s forces, had decided to call up every
male in the city under the age of forty. It was at that moment I decided to
escape to Odessa. By then, Mama’s nerves were better, and she had found
herself a place to live. Galya was making good money from her artificial
flowers, and the two of them had become friends of Amalia, who I knew
would not desert them. I gave Mama nearly all the money I had, and we
agreed that I would return to Kiev once things had quietened down. And so,
I left for Odessa with an easy mind.
   The first night passed safely, although the glow of burning villages
flickered in the wind along the horizon. The train felt its way forward, its
lights out. It stopped often and for long periods, as though listening to
strange noises in the night, uncertain whether it was safe to go on.
Sometimes it even reversed, backing up a bit into the shadows to hide from
the light of an especially bright fire. And every time I thought I saw
horsemen dressed in black crossing the rails far up ahead, unaware of our
presence.
   Riding together in our goods wagon were the five priests, an employee of
the Russian Word named Nazarov, and a fidgety Odessan with the Ribbon
of the Legion of Honour in his buttonhole. His name was Viktor Khvat. He
had served in the French army during the First World War and had even
fought at the famous First Battle of the Marne. Khvat joked the whole way,
mostly about his Jewish ancestry. He joked mainly to calm his fear. We all
knew that if we encountered one of the many gangs of bandits then
swarming across most of Ukraine Khvat would be the first one shot.
   In those days many new expressions for being shot appeared – ‘put up
against the wall’, ‘change’, ‘liquidate’, ‘send to Dukhonin’s HQ’, ‘settle
expenses’. Practically every region of the country had its own
colloquialisms. Khvat’s wit was a precious commodity – a good joke could
save a man from death back then. Nazarov had his own good qualities as
well, which had got him out of trouble more than once. He was by nature
simple-hearted, a trait that had won him the sympathy of even the cruellest
of bandits, and extremely short-sighted, a physical defect that others always
took as a sign that Nazarov must be both defenceless and harmless.
    The priests were pale, quiet and excessively polite young men. At the
first whiff of danger, they surreptitiously crossed themselves and cast
worried glances our way. By the third day, thick stubble had sprouted over
their smooth faces, and they had lost their elegant appearance. Just like the
rest of us, they had gone days without bathing. Their cassocks were torn
from frequent forays for firewood. At every stop, they jumped from the
train and with intense zeal tore apart wooden fences and crossing keepers’
huts for fuel to feed the engine. Viktor Khvat acted as the foreman of their
little brigade, which was considered one of the finest at its job.
    In Fastov, a plump, cheery young woman with pert eyes climbed aboard.
Her name was Lyusena. Before getting on, she flung a dusty bundle made
from an old, torn Gypsy shawl through the open door of our wagon. At that
moment, the priests were sitting quietly on their rough wooden bunks by the
door and chewing on pieces of dry, rock-hard rye flatbread. Khvat liked to
joke that horses had a particular taste for this bread, mostly because it was
made from straw.
    ‘Hey there, you oafs!’ Lyusena shouted at the priests. ‘Give a woman a
hand. It’s obvious I can’t climb up by myself.’
    The priests jumped up and bumped into each other in their rush to the
door. Embarrassed by their poor manners, they joined together and with all
their might lifted Lyusena into the wagon.
    ‘Ugh . . .’ she sighed, looking around the wagon. ‘Not exactly luxurious,
I see.’
    The priests just stood there awkwardly and said nothing.
    ‘All right, Your Graces, not to worry!’ said Lyusena, having finished her
inspection of the wagon. She reached down to hitch up a much-darned silk
stocking. ‘I’ll take the bunk in the dark corner over there, just so’s you don’t
think I’ve got designs on your virginity. Which is as much use to you as a
poultice to a corpse, I might add.’
    One of the priests giggled inappropriately, and Viktor Khvat said with a
presumptuous grin: ‘It’s clear to me, my dear, that with you here we’re all
as good as sunk. Although it’s certain to be fun and exciting.’
   ‘Shut up, pipsqueak,’ she said in a feigned bass voice. ‘I’m from Odessa,
got it? I’ve seen plenty of your types in my time. I don’t actually dance the
cancan, although I used to sing at the Tivoli Café in Kharkov. I could sing
you songs that would make even your weak blood boil, my dear little boy.
But enough joking around! Would it kill you to give a young lady a piece of
that bread there? I haven’t eaten a thing in two days.’
   We treated her to some of the rye flatbread and from that moment life in
our wagon became, as Khvat put it, ‘new and bright’. With her lively spirit
and indefatigable cheerfulness, Lyusena let nothing bother her. She joked
about every last thing, even the constant danger of our rickety old goods
train being shot up and captured by bandits, and teased the priests, who had
no idea what to make of her. She traded witticisms with Khvat, sang music-
hall songs and shocked the priests with her salacious stories. They moaned
disapprovingly, yet their eyes glowed with admiration for the woman they
called ‘the great whore, Panna Lyusena’. It was obvious how much they
liked her, and they kept trying to find justifications for Lyusena and her
ways in Catholic dogma, the Old and New Testaments, and practically even
in papal encyclicals.
   In the end, they proclaimed her the Mary Magdalene of our times, a
modern-day incarnation of the beautiful, red-headed prostitute who had
sinned day and night and was later canonised for her pure love of Christ,
she who had flung herself at the feet of the Crucified on Golgotha and by
covering them with her hair had eased the pain in His tortured limbs. A
great many women had travelled the same path from sin to sanctity, and as
proof faint gold haloes had been lit over their heads in the paintings of the
Great Masters of the Renaissance, and white lilies brushed their hems,
spreading the scent of chastity.
   The priests discussed this among themselves in low voices. I knew
enough Polish to follow along and listening to them it struck me that
Catholicism’s cult of the Madonna is nothing more than another
manifestation, albeit refined, of humanity’s eternal and undeniable
sensuality. I was to become even more convinced of this years later when I
saw the fair Madonnas, beckoning me with their coquettish eyes and
Gioconda smiles spread over their small, red, quivering lips, in the many-
coloured half-light of the cathedrals in Naples and Rome.
   Now, so many years later, none of this even seems possible: those
conversations in that beaten-up goods wagon where the autumn wind
whistled through the bullet holes and our motley company lived in such
cheerful harmony – Lyusena, the impoverished singer and prostitute, the
priests, the Knight of the Legion of Honour, the half-blind philosopher
Nazarov, a volume of Heine always in his hand, and me, a young man still
with no clear profession and prone to flights of fancy.

                                       •

The train began stopping even more often, and the engine had begun to
make imploring whistling noises. This meant that the fuel was running out,
and if we, passengers, wanted to keep going and not sit there like dead
ducks waiting for the closest gang to swoop down upon us, then we ought
to hop from our wagons and get to chopping down the nearest fences or
station toolsheds. Khvat would roll back the heavy door with a thud and
shout: ‘Your Eminences! Fetch your axes!’
   We had a crowbar and two axes with us. The priests grabbed the axes and
leapt from the wagon. Hitching up their skirts, they bared their heavy army
boots and puttees. We jumped out after them and raced for the nearest
fence. These raids were not always successful. Sometimes the owners of
these fences opened fire on us with their shotguns. Then the engine driver
started the train without bothering to give a warning whistle, Khvat yelled,
‘Christian soldiers! To the horses!’ and we ran back to the wagon and threw
ourselves in.
   After we had passed Belaya Tserkov, the train was shot at regularly. We
never saw who it was since the gunfire came from forests and dense groves
along the tracks. As soon as we heard shooting, we lay flat on our bunks.
Khvat called this ‘reducing the size of the target’. He insisted that a man
lying down was sixteen times less likely to be hit than one standing up. We
took little comfort in this, especially after a stray bullet pierced the wall of
our wagon right above Lyusena’s head, grazing her hair and shattering the
Spanish comb she had inherited from her grandmother, a market woman
who sold bubliki in the town of Rybnitsa on the Dniester. After hitting the
comb, the bullet howled and for a moment appeared to float in the air as if
looking for the exit before hitting the far wall and falling on the back of one
of the priests. He picked it up, tucked it away in his purse and swore to
hang it on a silver chain before the icon of the Black Madonna of
Chenstokhov as an ex-voto for sparing his life.
  Lyusena tidied her hair, sat up in her bunk and burst into a rollicking
song with her shrill voice:

       Good day, my Lyubka, good day, my lovely,
       Good day, my lovely, and goodbye!
       You’ve gobbled up our last strawberry –
       Now you’ve nothing but olives so don’t cry.

   The priests took to the song and joined in. Lyusena stopped singing,
thought for a moment, and then said: ‘If I’m killed, bury me in my Gypsy
shawl. I know the priests will send me off in proper style, of that I’m
certain.’
   Lying face down on their bunks (the shooting was not as frequent but had
not stopped), the priests squirmed strangely. It looked as though they were
doing everything possible not to laugh.
   ‘I’ll get to heaven,’ Lyusena said confidently. ‘No problem at all. I’ll just
sing St Peter a little chanson and he’ll weep from laughing. I can just see
him blowing his nose and saying: “Mademoiselle Lyusena, if only I’d met
you down on that sinful earth instead of here in this boring heaven. Oh,
what a time we’d have had! We’d have made people’s heads spin. ‘Aren’t
those two just something!’ they’d have said.”’
   The most reserved of the priests said: ‘That’s blasphemy, Panna Lyusena!
May Our Lady forgive you. As for us, we forgave you a long time ago.’
   ‘And I thank you for it,’ she replied, before adding softly: ‘Boys, my dear
friends! You have no idea how happy I am here with you. No one’s made a
pass at me or tried to put their greasy paws on me or even treat me like
some kind of tart. And nobody knows I’ve been shot through the breast
already. I shot myself in Lugansk. There’s a damned town by that name.
That’s where my little boy died. My little boy . . .’
   She lay face down on her bunk and slowly calmed down. No one said a
word.
   ‘And why the hell am I going to Odessa? What am I going to do there?’
Lyusena said suddenly, not raising her head.
   I got up and carefully opened the door. A small blue river was winding its
way across the dry steppe. The white autumn sun shone brightly. Its soft,
fading warmth touched my face. High up in the mists overhead, a flock of
cranes was being drawn to the south and the sea, as were we in our
grunting, shuddering train.
   A freckled, red-haired woman got on the train in Korsun. She was on her
way to her daughter’s wedding in Znamenka and was carrying a heavy
chest filled with her dowry. The woman was shrill and bad-tempered. A
flounce of dirty yellow lace dangled from under her skirt and brushed
against her greased hob-nailed boots. She ordered the hungry, pale-faced
railway guards about as though she were their ataman, shouting at them to
load the chest onto the train. But no one would make room for her. The
woman’s chest, her sweaty, red face and her screeching voice had turned the
whole train against her.
   This must have been the first time I saw a classic example of a kulak
woman – greedy, spiteful, petty, mean and intent on flaunting her wealth,
which wasn’t much except when viewed amid the general ruin and poverty.
Ukraine was full of ruthless, arrogant kulaks in those days. Women ready to
strangle their own fathers if there was a bit of profit to be had, while their
‘darling sons’ joined Makhno or Zelëny or some other ataman’s bandit gang
and, without batting an eyelid, buried people alive, smashed children’s
skulls with the butts of their rifles, and cut strips of skin from the backs of
Jews and Red Army men to make trophies.
   The woman was fussing around her chest, untying and retying the warm
shawl around her shoulders, and yelling in a strained voice: ‘You’ve filled
the train with hungry tramps, and now there’s no room left for us decent
folk. Just look at them, holes in their trousers and not a kopeck to their
names. And the women – tarts and worse! They ought to be squished like
dirty bugs and not taken for a drive from Kiev to Odessa.’
   A stoop-shouldered station official stood by her, not saying a word.
   ‘Don’t just stand there like an old goat! Why do you think I gave you that
bread and lard? So every last beggar here could laugh at me? You promised
to find me a seat – so do it! Or else I’ll take that bread and lard back this
instant.’
   The official shrugged his shoulders and walked off down the platform.
He stopped at every door and asked the passengers in a soft voice so the
woman wouldn’t hear: ‘For pity’s sake, make some room for her, the bitch.
Her husband’s the head of the village here, a real bandit. He’ll have me
beaten to death. There’s not a crumb in the house, again, and she did give
me a loaf.’
   But the passengers refused. Eventually, the official got the engine driver
to take her in return for the bread and lard. They decided to place the chest
on the buffer plate between the headlights. The chest was hauled up with
difficulty and then tied in place with a heavy rope to the engine. The
woman climbed on top of the chest and sat down like a broody hen, her
dirty skirt spread out over it, her warm shawl wrapped around her. The train
set off.
   So we puffed along, past whistling and jeering village boys, with the
chest on the engine and the furious woman perched on top. At each stop she
opened her basket and wolfed down great quantities of food. It’s doubtful
she was always hungry. She did it intentionally, out of spite, to have her
revenge on the hungry passengers and gloat over them. She cut herself
enormous slices of soft, pinkish lard, tore roast chickens apart with her
clawlike fingers, and stuffed her mouth with hunks of fluffy white bread.
Her cheeks glistened with fat. When she had finished, she let loose a loud,
satisfied burp. She rarely climbed down off her chest, and even when she
had to relieve herself she never took more than two or three steps away
from the train. It was not only shameless, it was a sign of her utter contempt
for everyone else.
   The driver grunted and turned away, but he never said anything. He still
hadn’t got a crumb of her bread or a single taste of her lard. She insisted she
wouldn’t give him anything until he delivered her to Znamenka. All of us
hated her with a passion stronger than the fear of death. A few of the
passengers went so far as to pray for some gang to come along and shoot up
the whole train. They were convinced the woman on her chest would be
killed first since she made such a perfect target.
   Somewhere past Bobrinets our dreams of vengeance were partly fulfilled.
One evening our train came under fire from Makhno’s men. Several bullets
hit the marriage chest. The woman was unscathed, but some of the dowry
was now full of holes. After that, the woman sat on the chest as though
made of stone, her lips pressed together so tightly they turned blue, her eyes
burning with such rage that none of the passengers dared to go near the
engine unless absolutely necessary.
   We kept waiting for revenge. I remembered Mama’s famous belief in the
great ‘law of retribution’. When I mentioned it, the priests became all
excited and were happy to confirm that such a law existed and was still in
effect, even during our civil war. Lyusena, on the other hand, was equally
certain there was no such law, but simply pathetic little men who lacked the
courage to throw the woman and her chest off the nearest bridge into a nice
deep river. And then, finally, it happened.
   The ‘Day of Retribution’ was suitably dark and overcast. Ragged, black
clouds tore with unbelievable speed over the barren fields. Sheets of rain
beat like hail against the peeling walls of Znamenka station. It seemed as
though the Goddess of Retribution herself had unleashed these angry
clouds, this pelting rain, this wet wind.
   It started with the woman giving the engine driver a single pound of lard
and a single loaf of bread instead of the promised four pounds and two
loaves. The driver didn’t say a thing. He even thanked her and helped the
fireman haul the chest down from the engine. The chest weighed a good
five hundred pounds, at least. It wasn’t easy removing it from the train and
setting it down on the track.
   ‘Two healthy bulls and they can hardly lift a single chest. Drag it over
here,’ said the woman.
   ‘Try it yourself,’ said the driver. ‘Damned thing’s heavy. I need to go and
get my crowbar.’ He climbed into the cab, but instead of grabbing his
crowbar, he released two scalding blasts of steam from either side of the
engine. The woman screamed and jumped out of the way. The driver then
put the train in motion and drove straight into the chest. It exploded with a
sharp crash into a dozen pieces, and out flew in every direction the
expensive dowry – a quilted bedspread, shirts, dresses, towels, knives,
spoons, rolls of fabric and even a nickel-plated samovar. With a triumphant
whistle, steam billowing, the engine drove over everything on its way to the
water pump. The samovar was left as flat as a pancake. But the driver
hadn’t finished yet. He put the engine in reverse, coming to a stop directly
over the remains of the dowry, at which point he let loose a shower of hot
water mixed with engine oil.
   The woman ripped off her shawl and began tearing at her hair before
falling face first into a large puddle with a heart-rending wail. Her hands,
which now held large clumps of hair, were shaking, and it looked almost as
if she were trying to swim to the other side. Then she jumped up and threw
herself at the driver. ‘I’ll tear your eyes out!’ she screamed, rolling up her
sleeves.
   A few men grabbed her. A small man elbowed his way through the
crowd. He consisted of new galoshes and an enormous checked cloth cap,
from under which stuck a long, sharp nose. The woman’s future son-in-law.
He had arrived late to greet her at the station. He looked at the destroyed
remains of the dowry, picked up the flattened samovar, tossed it at the
woman’s feet, and said in a high, grating voice: ‘Dearest Mama, thank you
ever so much for delivering the last of our things in such good condition.’
   The woman turned, grabbed him by the front of his shirt and spat in his
face. The crowd roared with laughter.

                                      •

We had stayed at Bobrinets for several days. The track up ahead, destroyed
by Makhno, was being repaired. To the south, savage hordes of outlaws
were laying waste to the countryside – roaring about on gun-carriages,
shooting up everything before them with their machine-guns, looting,
burning, raping, only to vanish at the first sight of serious resistance. The
little towns of Ukraine, pink with hollyhocks and, until recently, quiet and
traditional, now unleashed a wave of ataman-monsters. The bloody days of
the ‘Uman’ had returned, swords flashed, slicing off of the heads of thistles
one minute, men the next. Black flags emblazoned with white skull-and-
crossbones fluttered in the wind over the once peaceful steppes north of the
Black Sea. The Middle Ages paled before the brutality, violence and sudden
unreason of the twentieth century.
    Where had it all been hiding, slowly ripening, gathering strength and
biding its time? No one could say. History was racing backwards.
Everything had been thrown up into the air, and for the first time in many
years, we all became aware of our helplessness before each other’s
inhumanity. Nazarov talked about this most of all. The priests kept quiet.
Lyusena slept for days on end. As for Khvat, he didn’t care for such
conversations – they didn’t provide good material for his witticisms.
    The little town of Smela was four kilometres from Bobrinets. I had
visited here once as a boy with my Aunt Nadya and met the bearded artist
who was in love with her. The day after we stopped at Bobrinets, I walked
to Smela. Visits back to the places of one’s past tend to be melancholy
experiences. The mood is deepened by those unexpected encounters with
long-forgotten, and since altered, things, be it a crumbling old porch, a
dying poplar or a rusty letter-box, where I had once posted a letter to my
first love, a blue-eyed schoolgirl in Kiev.
   Smela was quiet and empty. People tried to avoid going out for fear of
running into Denikin’s drunken soldiers. Just as in my childhood, the river
Tyasmin was covered with a thick carpet of bright red duckweed that made
it look like a fresh spring meadow. The smell of marigolds drifted from
behind the fences.
   All these places – including Smela and Cherkassy – were connected to
the life of my family. As I strolled in Smela’s quiet streets, my seemingly
short life now suddenly stretched out before me into a long vista of crowded
years. People apparently like to recall their past because from a distance
everything becomes clearer. My own passion for exploring my memory
arose too early, when I was still quite young, and turned into a kind of
game. I didn’t look back on my life as a series of connected events but liked
to group things into various categories. So, for example, I would try to
remember every hotel I had ever stayed at (actually, they were mostly just
cheap lodging houses), or all the rivers I had seen, all the steamers I had
sailed on, or every girl I might have fallen in love with.
   This predilection proved to be not as silly as I had first supposed. Take
hotels. I would try to retrieve from my memory every last detail – the
colour of the faded runners in the corridors, the wall-paper designs, the
various smells, the prints on the walls, the faces of the maids, the way they
talked, the worn bentwood furniture – everything right down to the inkwells
made of stone from the Urals the colour of damp sugar which were always
filled with a few dead flies but never any ink. As I remembered, I tried to
see everything afresh, as though for the first time, and it was only later
when I began to write that I realised how useful this was to my work.
   I returned to the station at Bobrinets at dusk. I walked along one of the
steep sides of the railway embankment. A full moon was rising. Gunshots
rang out from the direction of Bobrinets. Suddenly, I could feel my heart
beating faster. I was gripped by the notion of how fortunate I was to live in
such an interesting moment in history, one full of contradictions and
confusion, but also of great hopes. I told myself that I had indeed been born
under a lucky star.

                                      •
Our train pulled into the station at Pomoshnaya early in the morning. We
were immediately shunted to a siding at the far end, where piles of old slag
were covered with the dry black stems of goosefoot. A short time later we
jumped down from our wagon and to our surprise found that our engine had
been uncoupled and was gone. There was not a soul to be seen up and down
the many tracks or along the platforms. It was as though the station had
died.
   I went to explore. The air in the station building was cold and grey. All
the doors were open, but I didn’t see a single person in the waiting room,
the buffet or the booking hall. The station appeared abandoned. After
pacing the echoing stone floors, I went out into the main square, walked
around to the back of the station, and came upon a rickety old door. I
opened it. A man in a red cap, most likely the station guard, sat hunched
over a desk in a narrow room with a high ceiling. He had pulled his hands
up inside the sleeves of his frayed greatcoat and didn’t make a move, but
just glanced at me with a pair of small, inflamed eyes. Greasy strands of
hair stuck out from under his red cap.
   ‘What’s happened?’ I asked him. ‘The station’s deserted.’
   He pulled his hands out of his sleeves and beckoned me mysteriously to
the table. I went over. He grabbed my hand with his cold damp fingers and
muttered softly: ‘Everyone’s fled into the steppe. I’m here all by myself. It
wasn’t even my shift, it was Bondarchuk’s, but he’s got a wife and children,
the poor devil. And I’ve got nobody, so that’s the way it is. He didn’t ask
me to, I volunteered to take his place.’
   The man squeezed my hand tighter and tighter. I was getting nervous.
He’s mad, I thought, and pulled my hand away. He gave me a puzzled look
and grinned. ‘Afraid, are you?’ he asked. ‘Me too.’
   ‘Of what?’
   ‘A bullet,’ said the guard. He stood up and began buttoning his coat.
‘Nobody knows where it is now, but there’s a bullet out there meant for my
head. So, I just sit, and wait.’
   He looked at the clock. ‘Half an hour yet.’
   ‘Until what?’
   ‘Makhno’s coming,’ he said suddenly in a clear, loud voice. ‘Understand?
He’ll be here in half an hour.’
   ‘Where did you hear that?’
   ‘From right here.’ The guard pointed at the telegraph key on the table.
‘From Edison. Before Edison, we led peaceful lives. Didn’t know nothing
but didn’t care. Now we can see what’s coming, and all that’s done is cause
us a lot of useless worry. Makhno’s been beaten near Golta. He’s heading
back home, to Gulyaipole. He sent a telegram – he’ll be passing through
Pomoshnaya with three train-loads of his men. Not planning on stopping.
Making for Zlatopol. Here’s his order: “All points and signals to be left
clear. Wait.” If we don’t, he’ll shoot every last one of us on the spot. Here,
look, it’s right here in the telegram: “Blanket Execution by Firing Squad.”’
The guard pointed to the tangle of telegraph tape on the table and sighed.
‘Let’s just hope he passes quickly, the son of a bitch. Are you from the
passenger train?’
   I said yes and smiled – a hell of a passenger train that was! A collection
of dirty, broken-down goods wagons that slumped from one side to the
other as it plodded along on bent, rusty wheels.
   ‘So, go back to the train and tell everyone to lock the doors and don’t let
Makhno see so much as the tips of their noses. If he does, you’ll all be lined
up in a ditch in front of a machine-gun before you know it.’
   I returned to the train with this staggering piece of news. We immediately
locked every door on the train and extinguished all the iron stoves so the
smoke from the tin chimneys wouldn’t give us away. Many of the
passengers took comfort in the fact that between the main line and us stood
a long empty goods train to provide cover. But Khvat and I weren’t pleased
with this arrangement – we both wanted to have a look at Makhno’s men.
Ducking behind coaches and sheds, we made our way over to the station.
The guard was happy to see us. In a situation like this, no one wants to be
alone.
   ‘Go over to the buffet. There’s a good view of everything from the
windows,’ he said.
   ‘And what about you?’
   ‘I’ll go out onto the platform and wave the train through with my green
flag.’
   Khvat looked at the guard doubtfully. ‘Maybe it’d be best if you didn’t go
out,’ he said.
   ‘What are you talking about? I’m the station guard. If I don’t, the engine
driver will stop the train, and then it’s farewell, my sweet little Dusya,
you’ll have to write to me in heaven.’
   Khvat and I walked over to the buffet. We found a wooden board with a
prehistoric timetable of departures and arrivals and moved it over to the
window. We could hide behind it and watch without being seen. In case of
danger, it was easy to reach the kitchen from the buffet and then from there
slip down into a dark cellar.
   A dingy tomcat with rusty spots came up the cellar stairs, gave us a
passing glance, walked across the empty tables and counter, jumped onto
the windowsill, sat down with his back to us, and, like ourselves, began to
stare at the empty tracks. He was apparently displeased with all the strange
goings-on in the station, for the tip of his tail never stopped twitching
irritably. He bothered us, but we decided to let him be. We understood that
he was a railway cat and had every right to sit here, whereas we, mere
passengers, should know our place. Now and then, he shot us exasperated
looks. Then he pricked up his ears, and we heard the emphatic whistle of an
engine racing furiously towards the station. I pressed my face to the
window and saw the guard. He rushed out onto the platform, straightened
his coat and raised his furled green flag.
   Blowing clouds of steam into the air, the train tore through the station,
pulling a string of alternating goods and flat wagons. What went by on the
open flat wagons struck me as raving madness.
   I saw hideous, laughing young men all covered with weapons – curved
sabres, broadswords, silver-hilted daggers, Colts, rifles and cartridge belts.
Large black and red ribbons flew in the wind from tall astrakhan hats, caps,
bowlers and every headdress imaginable. The largest ribbon, I noticed, had
been stuck to a crumpled top hat. The owner, in a fur coat with the bottom
cut off for greater freedom of movement, was firing into the air, apparently
a salute to the station of Pomoshnaya, which was holding its breath in
terror.
   One of Makhno’s men lost his boater in the wind. It rolled a long way
down the platform before coming to a gentle stop near the guard’s feet. The
boater looked frivolous, despite its sinister black band. The dream of every
provincial Don Juan, the hat must have until recently covered the parting
atop some well-groomed barber’s head. It’s not hard to imagine that this
dandyism had cost him his life. Next, a scrawny, hook-nosed sailor with a
neck as long as a giraffe’s swept past. His striped vest had been ripped
down to his navel, obviously to show off the extravagant, menacing tattoo
on his chest. It flashed by so fast that all I could make out was a tangle of
women’s legs, hearts, daggers and snakes. The faint outline had been filled
in with pinkish ink almost the colour of strawberry juice. If I were to give it
a style, I’d say it was Rococo.
   The sailor was followed by a fat Georgian in green velvet riding
breeches, a feather boa around his neck. He stood balanced on a gun-
carriage alongside two machine-guns, their barrels pointing straight at us.
The cat watched this travelling circus and quivered with delight, one minute
putting out his claws, the next drawing them back in. After a drunk blond
youth in a priest’s stole who was clutching a roasted goose, an old man with
a majestic head of white hair flowing out from beneath a school cap with its
badge broken off whooshed solemnly by. He held in his hand a Cossack
lance to which a torn black skirt had been tied. Painted on it was a white
sunrise.
   Every flat wagon flung snatches of sound onto the platform as it passed –
the crying wail of an accordion, shrill whistles, a few words of a song. One
song interrupted the next. ‘Arise now, boys!’ roared one wagon, ‘To
Patashon’s Call’ chorused another, while a third shouted: ‘Rest in peace,
rest in peace! That’s the end of Rabinovich’s wife, she’s gone and lost her
life!’ After this the sad ending of the first song rose up: ‘And who’s that
lying there under the green grave so proud?’ to which the next wagon
provided the mournful reply: ‘One of Makhno’s heroes, a saddle blanket for
his shroud.’
   The first troop train passed, followed immediately by the second. Gun-
carriages turned upside down to face the sky created a forest of metal shafts
that bounced and swayed with the movement of the wagons. Inside the
goods wagons, scruffy horses stood in profile, shaking their heads. Instead
of blankets, they were covered with tallits, Jewish prayer shawls. The
horsemen sat on the flat wagons, legs dangling over the side. Yellow riding
boots swung by, wellingtons, traditional felt valenki, sandals, worn-out
shoes held in place with twine, silver spurs, expensive hussars’ boots with
officers’ cockades on the sides, waders, orange slippers with pompoms,
horny red feet, puttees cut from red plush or a billiard table’s green baize.
   Unexpectedly, the train slowed down. The guard looked around
helplessly, but then drew himself up and froze. We moved back from the
window, ready to run for our lives. But the train didn’t stop. It moved on
slowly, smoothly through the station. Another flat wagon came into view
carrying nothing but a luxurious, highly polished landau with some prince’s
gilded coat of arms on the side. From one of the shafts, raised up like a
flagpole, hung a black flag with the words ‘Anarchy is the Mother of
Order!’ A machine-gun had been mounted in each of the wagon’s four
corners, next to which sat one of Makhno’s men in a khaki-coloured
English greatcoat.
   A frail little man with a pallid green face in a black hat and an
unbuttoned Cossack kaftan lay sprawled out on the landau’s back seat of
rich red morocco. His feet were propped up against the coach box, and his
whole bearing suggested a lazy, calm, well-fed indifference. He had
stretched out one of his arms and was playing with his Mauser, tossing it up
into the air and catching it as it fell.
   The sight of his face made me sick. A damp fringe hung over his low,
frowning forehead. His eyes – at once vicious and vacant, the eyes of a
skunk and a paranoiac – burned with malevolence. Even now, despite his
relaxed and stately pose, he seemed to simmer with a fierce violence which
permeated his being.
   This was Nestor Makhno.
   The guard, standing unnaturally stiff and erect, held out the green flag
with his right arm, while saluting Makhno with his left. At the same time,
he smiled. This smile was the most horrifying thing imaginable. It was not a
smile at all. It was an abject supplication, a pitiful call for mercy, a
desperate, terrified appeal to spare a poor life. Makhno lazily raised his
Mauser and, without bothering to aim or even look at the guard, fired. Why,
I don’t know. Can anyone guess what goes on in the mind of a satanic
monster?
   The guard threw up his hands in a strange manner, stumbled, fell on his
side and began to convulse on the platform, grabbing at his neck, which was
spilling blood. Makhno waved his hand. Instantly, machine-gun fire raked
the platform, hitting the guard. He twitched a few more times and then lay
still.
   We rushed out onto the platform. The last flat wagon was rolling past. A
snub-nosed girl with cropped, curly hair, dressed in an astrakhan jacket and
riding breeches, smiled from ear to ear and levelled her Mauser at us. The
man next to her, his face covered in black stubble, a French steel helmet on
his head, gave her a push. The bullet missed us and buried itself harmlessly
in the wall. We ran up to the guard. He was dead. The imploring smile had
frozen to his face. We lifted him, trying not to step in the large puddle of
blood, and carried him to the buffet, where we laid him down on a long
table next to a dried-out palm in a green pot. The soil in the pot bristled
with yellowed cigarette butts.
   It wasn’t until the next morning that our train was able to leave for Golta.
The priests were quiet and spent the entire day reading in whispers from
their prayer books. Lyusena lay on her bunk, silent and staring at the watery
sky through the open door. Khvat sat alone, frowning to himself. Nazarov
was the only one who tried to make conversation, but he soon realised no
one cared to talk and gave up.
   We arrived in Golta a few hours after a pogrom. We heard that many
Jews had been killed and were lying dead in the streets. We never found out
who was responsible. None of us wished to go into town and see for
ourselves.
   In the middle of the night, Lyusena began to cry, softly at first, then
louder and louder until she was sobbing hysterically. Towards dawn she
calmed down. Later that morning, when we awoke at some halfway halt,
Lyusena was gone. We searched the whole train but didn’t find her. No one
had seen her. She had vanished and left behind her bundle in the Gypsy
shawl – it seemed she had no more use for it.

                              OceanofPDF.com
87
Firinka, Running Water and a Bit of Danger



Firinka, a small Black Sea fish about the size of a large safety pin, was
always fresh because it was the only fish for sale in the shops and all
Odessa ate (or, as the more polite Southerners preferred, ‘dined on’) this
little insignificant creature. But sometimes even firinka ran out. It was eaten
raw, lightly salted, or minced and fried as fishcakes. The fishcakes could be
eaten only when the alternative was starvation and, as the Odessans said,
were best served ‘with a garnish of tears’.
    Nazarov and I (we were neighbours) were nearly broke. We lived on
nothing but firinka and soggy maize bread. It looked like a grainy biscuit
but tasted of pure aniseed. We had to thoroughly rinse our mouths to get rid
of the intense taste of that bread. Once in a while I bought roast chestnuts.
They were sold by weary old women in heavy fringed shawls who sat on
low benches along the pavement, slowly stirring the nuts cooking in the
braziers. The chestnuts crackled, burst and gave off an aroma of burnt bark,
although sweeter and more fragrant.
    Odessa was dark. The street lamps were lit very late or not at all, and so
on many quiet autumn nights the only light was the fire of these braziers.
The low-slung glow creeping over the pavements lent the city a certain
magical quality. The old women wrapped themselves in shawls, while
Odessa wrapped itself in fog. The whole autumn passed in this sea-fog
shroud. I must admit, I’ve loved foggy days ever since, especially in the
autumn when they are infused with the languid lemon yellow of fallen
leaves.
    It was extremely difficult to find lodgings in Odessa, but we were lucky.
On Cape Langeron, in quiet, peaceful Chernomorskaya Street overlooking
the sea, stood Dr Landesman’s private sanatorium for nervous diseases.
These anxious, unsettled times had produced a great rise in nervous
disorders, but nobody had any money for treatment, especially in an
expensive private clinic like Dr Landesman’s, which is why it had been
closed.
   Nazarov had run into a woman he knew from Moscow, a neurologist, and
she arranged for us to live in the empty sanatorium. Landesman, a majestic
and exceedingly polite gentleman, offered us two small rooms with white
walls in return for our acting as caretakers. It was our job to make sure no
one chopped down the little orchard for firewood or dismantled the house
and carted it away.
   The central heating didn’t work, and the little metal ‘burzhuika’ stove
could not warm my room with its exceptionally high ceiling and large
windows. Firewood was almost impossible to come by. Now and then I
managed to buy some acacia logs, which were sold by the pound. The most
I could afford was a few pounds’ worth. It was bitterly cold, especially
when the winds blew out of the north. The sanatorium’s walls of glazed
white tiles made it feel even colder.
   Once again, I got a job as a proofreader for a newspaper (I’ve forgotten
its name). It was published by Academician Ovsyaniko-Kulikovsky.1 I
worked every third day and earned very few ‘bells’ – the popular slang for
Denikin paper roubles engraved with an image of the Tsar Bell in the
Kremlin.
   I enjoyed living in the echoing mansion by the sea. I liked the total
solitude it provided and even the cold grainy air that smelled of salt. I read a
lot, wrote some, and for lack of anything better to do, studied the fog. In the
mornings, I went out into the garden and stood on the edge of the cliff over
the sea. The invisible surf slowly rolled over the shingle. The foghorn blew
dolefully and the bell tolled on the Vorontsov lighthouse. Small grey drops
of dew shone on the long-withered grass and the branches of the acacias.
   Ever since, fog has been associated in my mind with solitude, with a
quiet life of concentration. It reduced the world to a small, visible circle,
leaving only a few things available for observation – some trees, a gorse
bush, a column of rough stone, an iron gate and an anchor chain lying for
no apparent reason in a corner of the garden. It forced me to look at them
longer and more carefully than we normally do, and I discovered in them
many hitherto unnoticed details. The porous yellow stone was encrusted
with tiny seashells and on the gorse a few flowers remained, sitting on
straight, stiff branches like so many drenched, wrinkled golden butterflies
waiting patiently for the sun. But it seldom showed through the fog and
then only as a smudgy white blur that provided neither warmth nor shade.
Under the one old plane tree, lemon-yellow splotches on its trunk, lay piles
of leaves that looked as though cut from dull green velvet. Columns of ants
scurried along the iron gate, carrying the last load of winter supplies to their
underground granaries, and beneath the anchor lived a timid little toad.
   The fog had its own sounds. They appeared shortly before it melted
away. It began with a vague rustling. The watery dust of sea spray merged
to form drops which collected on the dark tree branches and then fell to the
ground with faint plops. Next, a clear, echoing thunk was added to this soft
music – the first drop of condensed fog had fallen from the roof and landed
on the bottom of the upturned zinc tub below.
   I loved the smell of fog as well, which carried with it a scent of coal
smoke and steam. It was the smell of railway stations, of docks and ship
decks – everything that spoke of travel, of long journeys over land and sea,
of voyages through violet-blue light to distant pink islands bathed in the
sweet aroma of lemons, of the raw wind and warning lights in the English
Channel, of the rhythmic clatter of a train rolling through our slumbering
Russian forests, of everything that captivates our frail human hearts.
   In Odessa, I was seized by the idea of spending my whole life travelling
so that I might live whatever years were granted me in the discovery of new
things and people, and to use whatever talent I possessed to write books
about my experiences and then give these books – books filled with the
whole world in all its variety – to the young woman, as yet unmet, who
would fill my life with joy and pain and wonderment at the beauty of the
world, the world as it should be but so rarely is. At the time, I was certain
that this would be my future. For a writer, to give to the beloved is to give
to all humanity. I was convinced of this ill-defined law of generosity and of
the need to give of oneself freely and completely. To give and not expect or
ask for anything in return, no matter how small, this was all that mattered.
   All I have just written is a lyrical digression. Literary critics like to warn
writers against them: they upset the natural order of things and serve only to
confuse readers, so they say. But it seems to me that there’s no reason why
one shouldn’t write an entire book this way – freely and without the
slightest constraint – submitting to nothing other than the uninterrupted
flow of ideas and imagination. Perhaps this is the only way to achieve
complete, total expression.
                                      •

All the same, I must get back to the firinka, the maize bread and that
autumn in Odessa.
   The lack of food never bothered me much, particularly after I acquired
two tins of concentrated Dutch coffee from the cook on the French
steamship Dumont d’Urville, then in port. I traded him a packet of Stamboli
tobacco for it. The tobacco had once belonged to my father and for some
reason Mama had saved it for years and later given it to me. The Dumont
d’Urville was berthed next to an English destroyer at the Quarantine Pier.
The sailors from the destroyer played football on the pier all day. The black
and yellow steamers of the Lloyd Triestino line called regularly from
Trieste and Venice. Groups of Greek sailors walked the streets of Odessa.
Their blue uniforms, white gaiters with little round buttons and broad
cutlasses looked old-fashioned and theatrical.
   Odessa was full of an incredible mix of people that year. The smalltime
stock exchange gamblers and black marketeers were overrun by an invasion
of ruthless and brutal speculators fleeing from what they themselves
spitefully called ‘Sovdepia’. The local dealers could only shake their heads
and sigh – gone were the good old days when a single crumpled bill of
lading for a single wagonload of lemon extract in Arkhangelsk could
change hands for a whole month among the patrons of the Fanconi Café,
rising and falling in price so that everyone could make a turn ‘on the
difference’. Arkhangelsk was farther away than Mars, and lemon extract
had long been a myth. But this didn’t bother the black marketeers. Their
dealings sounded like a loud game at the lunatic asylum. They haggled until
they were hoarse, shook hands over deals, took umbrage, and at times this
load of lemon extract or some equally mythical cargo of sponges (Porto
Franco Patras, Greece) ended in loud and seemingly endless rows.
Sometimes actual deals were made – for a package of saccharine, a batch of
old braces or a suspicious-looking packet of sal ammoniac. At the time sal
ammoniac wasn’t cheap. It was a popular substitute for yeast.
   But the speculators pouring in from the north put these peaceful,
philosophical locals to shame with the sheer audacity of their deal making.
Brilliant diamonds, from the tsar’s own crown, of course; crisp new sterling
and franc notes; luxurious scented furs straight from the shoulders of
Petrograd’s most famous beauties – all this and more passed into the hands
of razor-stubbled Greek merchants. They did a particularly lucrative
business selling the landed estates of the old nobility in provinces all over
Mother Russia.
   Every evening, one could see many well-known figures mingling with
the flower girls on Deribasovskaya Street. Most of them, it was true, were
looking rather shabby and agitated by the epidemic of outlandish rumours.
In this respect, Odessa was way ahead of all the other southern towns. The
rumours were indeed outlandish but frightening too. They blew into the city
on the gusty north wind from the Kherson steppes. The Soviet army was
charging south, demolishing covering forces, tightening the noose around
the Whites, cutting off their escape routes. The Whites’ thin front line was
breaking like rotten thread, one minute here, the next there.
   Every time the front was broken, more deserters flooded into Odessa.
Drunken noise filled the bars until morning – women shrieked, dishes
crashed, shots rang out. The defeated tried to settle accounts and figure out
who among them were the traitors responsible for Russia’s destruction. The
white skulls on the sleeves of the officers of the ‘Death Battalions’ were
yellow with dirt and grease, and no longer scared anyone. The city lived
from hand to mouth. According to official estimates, supplies of food and
coal should have run out long ago, but, by some miracle, they hadn’t. Only
the city centre had electricity, and even there the lights did little more than
flicker dimly. No one acknowledged the Whites’ authority, including the
Whites themselves.
   Three thousand bandits from Moldavanka led by Mishka Yaponchik2
looted lazily, clumsily, half-heartedly. They were sated with fabulous hauls
from their previous raids and wanted to relax after this exhausting work.
They joked more than they stole, they caroused in the restaurants, they cried
as they sang the heart-rending song of the death of Vera Kholodnaya: ‘Poor
Runich weeps, / Over Vera’s grave.’
   Runich3 had acted alongside Vera Kholodnaya. According to the lyrics,
Vera begs him from her grave:

       In bright cornflowers blue,
       Do wreathe my cold breast.
       With tears of love so true
       Show that you loved me best.
   One evening I walked back home to Chernomorskaya Street from the
editorial office with Yakov Lifshitz, a journalist from Petrograd. Homeless,
Lifshitz joined us as the third lodger at Dr Landesman’s. A short,
dishevelled, restless man, he was known as ‘Yasha on Wheels’. This was
because when he walked, he rolled from heel to toe with a strange rocking
motion, something like a blotter absorbing ink on paper. Yasha didn’t
appear to be walking but gliding as though on roller skates. His shoes even
looked like ink blotters – the soles were bent in a convex arc.
   ‘Yasha on Wheels’ and I walked along, picking the small side streets and
lanes to try to avoid the patrols. In one of them, two young men in matching
jockey caps came out of a doorway. They stopped to have a smoke. We
were walking right towards them, but they made no sign of moving. It
looked as though they were waiting for us.
   ‘Thugs,’ I whispered to Yasha.
   He snorted at this and said: ‘Nonsense! Thugs don’t work deserted streets
like these. We need to check.’
   ‘How?’
   ‘By talking to them. It’s obvious.’
   Yasha had a pet theory – always approach danger head on. He was
convinced that this theory had saved him from many a tight spot.
   ‘What are we going to talk to them about?’ I asked, puzzled.
   ‘Any old thing. It makes no difference.’
   Yasha walked quickly up to the two men and asked them out of the blue:
‘Could you tell me, please, how to get to Chernomorskaya Street?’
   The young men began to politely explain it to him. It was complicated,
and so it took them a long time to describe the route, especially because
Yasha kept interrupting them. Finally, Yasha thanked them, and we went on
our way.
   ‘There now, you see,’ said a triumphant Yasha. ‘My theory never fails.’
   I agreed with him, and then, the very next moment, we heard the men call
us. We stopped. They came up and one of them said: ‘You do know, of
course, that everyone who goes past Alexandrovsky Park, which you’ll
have to do to get to Chernomorskaya, is robbed of their coat?’
   ‘Really, everyone’s coat?’ Yasha said with a laugh.
   ‘Well, almost everyone,’ the young man corrected himself and smiled.
‘They’ll steal yours. That’s for sure. So, it’s better you take it off now. It
can’t make any difference to you whether you lose it here in Kanatny Lane
or at the park, right?’
   ‘Well, I guess you’re right . . .’ said Yasha, all flustered.
   ‘How nice of you. Now please be so kind.’
   The young man flicked a knife out of his sleeve. I had never in my life
seen such a long, beautiful knife. It was as sharp as a razor. He held it close
to Yasha’s stomach.
   ‘If it’s not too much trouble,’ the man with the knife said, ‘please remove
everything from the pockets you might need, except money. Wonderful! I
thank you. Goodnight! No, please, don’t bother,’ he said, turning to me,
‘one coat is plenty for us. Greed is the mother of all sins. On your way then,
and don’t look back. It never pays to look back, does it?’
   We walked home, not terribly upset by what had just happened. The
whole way Yasha kept waiting for someone to come and take my coat, but
no one ever did. He became gloomy after a while and angry with me, as
though it were my fault they took his coat and not mine. I got the feeling he
actually wondered whether I had been in cahoots with the two thieves.
   In general, Yasha was extremely unlucky. Nazarov always tried to
convince us that Yasha was a Jonah. As proof, he offered two incidents.
Unfortunately, I could not refute their veracity because I had seen them with
my own eyes. The first involved a large jug of water, the second a
thermometer.
   At the time, Odessa was experiencing an acute water shortage. It had to
be brought all the way from the river Dniester, over sixty kilometres away.
The water pump on the Dniester was barely working. It had been shot up
and attacked by numerous gangs. Odessa was hanging by a thread – it
might be left without water at any moment. There was still water in the
pipes, sometimes, but only in the areas of the city closest to sea level. Long
queues of people from all over Odessa trudged to these more fortunate
neighbourhoods from dawn until dusk, carrying with them every sort of
pail, bucket, pitcher and kettle. Only a lucky few – the owners of carts –
arrived with barrels to fetch water. We both envied and hated them, despite
the fact that they had to harness themselves to their carts. It was painful to
watch as they puffed and panted their way up the hills or chased, horrified,
after these same carts when they got away from them and began careering
back downhill, spilling a good half of the water.
   We took turns fetching water over on Uspenskaya Street, a couple of
kilometres away. I knew every cellar with a tap on that street so well I could
find them all blindfolded. As we queued we heard all the latest news and
gossip and the ‘regulars’ greeted each other as though they were dear old
friends. The poet Vera Inber lived near us in shady Observatorny Lane.4 She
always fetched water with the same vase, made of frosted, multi-coloured
glass and decorated with purple irises in relief. Inber, a slight, frail woman,
slipped one day and broke her vase. The following day, however, she was
back with another one just like it. Out of sheer compassion, I carried the
vase of water back home for her. Inber’s fear that I would drop and break
this last vase of hers was exhausting and made my legs shake.
   Quite naturally, I had to be careful carrying all that water. I always
watched my footing and so came to learn everything there was to know
about the roads and pavements between Chernomorskaya and Uspenskaya
Streets. I became convinced that looking down as I walked was an alluring
and at times even useful activity. There were a good many little objects to
see, all of which stimulated various thoughts and ideas. Some of these
objects were pleasant, some indifferent, and some were bad.
   The worst, and most common, were drops, and at times whole pools, of
blood and Mauser cartridges. The cartridges had an acrid smell of
gunpowder. Empty purses and torn documents were also bad. Those were
less common, however. There were fewer pleasant objects, but they were
more varied. Typically, they were utterly unexpected – dried flowers from a
bouquet, fragments of cut glass, desiccated crab claws, empty packets of
Egyptian cigarettes, little girls’ hair ribbons, rusty fishhooks. They all spoke
of a world at peace. The tufts of grass growing up here and there between
the paving stones also counted among the pleasant things. As did the little
flowers, most of them withered, and the round flat stones in the cement
gutters washed clean by the rain. Most of the objects belonged to the
indifferent category – buttons, copper coins, pins, cigarette butts. No one
paid them any attention.
   We poured our water into a large glass jug in the hall. One day, Yasha left
his room and started screaming wildly. I rushed out into the hall and
witnessed something inexplicable: right in front of Yasha and me, our
enormous jug slowly began to tip over, pausing for a few seconds like the
Tower of Pisa, before falling onto the floor and shattering into a thousand
pieces. Our precious water ran gurgling down the stairs. We could have
caught the jug, but for some reason we just stood there without moving as
though bewitched.
   The second incident, with the thermometer, was even stranger. I fell ill
with Spanish flu. Thermometers in Odessa were as rare as pineapples.
There was only a handful of them in the entire city. People treasured their
thermometers no less than shipwrecked sailors treasure their last match.
   Nazarov asked to borrow one for a couple of days from our editor, the
illustrious Academician Ovsyaniko-Kulikovsky. As a celebrated
humanitarian and venerable guardian of Russia’s liberal traditions,
Ovsyaniko-Kulikovsky could not possibly say no. Biting his lips and
groaning (the strongest expressions of displeasure he ever made), he gave
Nazarov the thermometer with strict instructions to wrap it in cotton wool
and keep it safely stored in a drawer. Nazarov, Ovsyaniko-Kulikovsky
warned, must cherish the thermometer like the apple of his eye.
   Nazarov took my temperature, but he forgot about Ovsyaniko-
Kulikovsky’s instructions. He put the thermometer down on my bedside
table and went off into town. I fell asleep. Yasha woke me up. He tried to
open the door carefully, but it made a loud squeak. I glanced at the table and
could feel the hair on my head rise – the thermometer had started to roll
slowly to the edge of the table. I wanted to scream but couldn’t. I saw the
look of terror in Yasha’s eyes. He too was watching the thermometer,
motionless. It rolled off the table, fell and shattered on the floor. My fever
broke, no doubt from the shock. I recovered almost immediately.
   We racked our brains for a long time about how we were going to find
another thermometer. The next two days Nazarov called in sick to avoid
running into Ovsyaniko-Kulikovsky. In the end, we had to resort to crime.
We found the key to Dr Landesman’s office and found a thermometer in his
desk drawer. To put it in the evasive language of thieves, we ‘took’ it
(thieves never like to use the word ‘steal’) and returned it to Ovsyaniko-
Kulikovsky.
   After these two incidents, Nazarov tried to convince me that Yasha was
dangerous and urged me never to go out with him again. I just laughed at
him, for which I was soon to be cruelly punished. In order to explain
precisely what happened, I must first say a few words about Sturdzovsky
Lane. It led to Chernomorskaya Street and was impossible to avoid.
   This little street, named after the famous Alexander Sturdza, a
contemporary of Pushkin, always evoked in us a sense of hidden danger,
perhaps because the sides were lined with nothing but tall garden walls
made of heavy stone, behind which large gardens stretched all the way to a
high cliff overlooking the sea. The long, blank walls up and down
Sturdzovsky Lane offered no protection, no cover. In those days, before
walking down any street, we had all developed the habit of scoping out the
quickest places to hide or take shelter from gunfire or drunken patrols.
There wasn’t a single hiding place on Sturdzovsky Lane, unless one
counted a sole two-storey house with its deeply recessed doorway. The
house stood abandoned. Weeds grew out of the broken windows.
   I paid Nazarov no heed, and late one autumn night walked back home
again with Yasha from the office. Walking the streets at night required strict
observance of a number of unwritten laws. First of all, no smoking, no
talking, no coughing. Second, walk quietly, minimising the sound of one’s
feet. Third, stick close to the walls or in the shadows of trees. Fourth, every
forty or fifty steps, stop, look and listen, being sure to search the darkness
for any movement. And fifth, at every intersection, scan the cross street to
see that it was clear and then make a quick dash to the other side.
   We made it safely to Sturdzovsky Lane, and then stopped at the corner,
listening and peering into the inky darkness for a long time to make sure the
coast was clear. On the one hand, the darkness helped us to hide. On other
hand, it also helped the enemy to hide. There was the danger of walking
straight into a trap.
   Everything was quiet, so quiet we could even hear the faint rumble of the
surf. We crept stealthily down the lane. Before we set out, I had told Yasha
that we should make our way down the side of the street with the doorway,
stop before we reached it, and then quickly and quietly dart past it. I had
worked it out mathematically. If anyone was hiding in the doorway, they
might well not see us coming. If we went down the other side of the lane,
however, they could see us from a good way off. According to my
calculation, if we walked on the other side, we would be in sight of the
enemy five times longer. Thus, the danger to us would be five times greater.
   But Yasha had countered my theory with his own, namely that it’s always
better to face danger head-on. Even though we had been whispering, I
didn’t argue with him for the simple reason I didn’t want to risk being
discovered, and so we set off down the side of the street opposite the
doorway.
    Yasha counted the seconds to himself. We knew it took seven minutes to
walk from Sturdzovsky Lane to Dr Landesman’s. We always felt safe once
we were back at the sanatorium, behind its high wall and iron gates,
especially if we made sure not to light the oil lamps. As we were passing
the doorway, Yasha stumbled. Whenever we talked about this incident later,
Yasha always insisted that the more you concentrate on doing something
perfectly, the more likely you are to make some foolish mistake. As for me,
I was convinced it was all due to his absurd way of walking. But I never
told him this to spare his feelings. Anyway, Yasha stumbled, and he was so
shocked that instead of cursing silently to himself, he blurted out ‘Sorry!’ in
a loud, embarrassed voice.
    ‘Don’t move!’ shouted a husky voice from the doorway. The sharp beam
of an electric torch hit us squarely in the face. ‘Hands out of your pockets!
Now! You bastards!’
    Several armed men came up to us. It was a Cossack patrol.
    ‘Papers!’ said the man with the husky voice.
    I handed him my identity card. The Cossack shone his torch on it and
then on me. ‘Damned foreigner! Greek, most likely,’ he said. ‘Mackerel
with a slice of lemon, that’s what you are. This is obviously fake. Here, take
it.’
    He handed back my identity card and then shone the light on Yasha.
‘Don’t even bother showing me your papers,’ he said. ‘Anyone can see
you’re a general in the Jerusalem army. Go on, get out of here!’
    We walked on a few paces.
    ‘Stop!’ the same Cossack shouted suddenly in a shrill voice. ‘Don’t
move!’
    We stopped.
    ‘What are you dawdling for? Didn’t I tell you to get a move on?’
    We started walking again, slowly, trying to hide our fear. Every nerve in
my body was stretched tight. I could feel the barrels of their guns trained on
our backs even though I hadn’t heard the clicking of the bolts. I realised
now they were playing a deadly game of cat and mouse with us. They were
going to kill us, and any moment might be our last.
    ‘Stop! You motherf——rs!’ the Cossack screamed again.
    The other men snickered.
    We stopped again, this time alongside the wall. I couldn’t see it in the
dark, but I knew it was made of rough stone and so there must be places to
grab hold of.
   ‘Over the wall,’ I whispered to Yasha. ‘In one go. Otherwise we’re dead.’
   I was thin and light. It was easy for me to climb over the wall. But Yasha,
with his big, heavy roller-skate shoes, nearly fell off. I grabbed his hand and
pulled. We threw our legs over the top of the wall and jumped. Shots rang
out behind us, and chunks of rock exploded along the top of the wall. We
raced through the dark garden. The tree trunks had been treated with white
lime, which helped us to find our way. The Cossacks had climbed the wall
by now and were on our tails. A bullet whistled past my ear. We made it to
the wall on the far side of the garden. There was a gap in it. The Cossacks
were now running through the garden, but they wasted time aiming and
firing their rifles and so we managed to squeeze through the gap. Another
three paces and we were on the edge of a steep cliff over the sea.
   We scrambled down the cliff and took off running along the shore. The
Cossacks kept firing from up above but had lost us by now in the darkness.
We picked our way for some time down the shoreline, over large rocks and
past dark caves. The surf drowsily rolled up on the shingle. It was hard to
believe that a man could kill another man just like himself for no good
reason on such a warm autumn night filled with the scent of thyme and the
gentle sounds of the whispering sea. I was still naïve enough to believe that
beauty could appease evil and that murder was impossible before the Sistine
Madonna or atop the Acropolis.
   I was dying for a smoke. The shooting had stopped, so we climbed into
the first cave and lit our cigarettes. Never in my life have I enjoyed a
cigarette more. We sat in the cave for about three hours before coming out
and walking stealthily along the rocky shore towards the sanatorium. All
was quiet. Clinging to the rocks and bushes, we climbed up the cliff to the
high fortress-like wall of the sanatorium. We located a culvert, slithered
through it, stuffed it full of rocks behind us, even though this was
completely unnecessary, and went inside.
   Nazarov was not asleep. He was stunned by our tale. We went into the
windowless bathroom, lit the oil lamp and got our first look at ourselves.
Our clothes were all torn, our hands cut and bleeding, but on the whole, we
were lucky to be alive. We gulped down lots of tea and got drunk. Not from
the tea, of course, but from an amazing, incomparable feeling of lightness
that came from being safe. If perfect happiness exists, we experienced it
that night.
   I wanted to hold onto this feeling as long as possible. I changed my
clothes, grabbed a blanket and went out to the loggia – a deep bay with a
projecting balcony on the first floor. It was dark there and protected from
the wind. No one could see me from the street below. I lay down on a
wicker chaise longue, wrapped the blanket around me and stayed there until
dawn, listening to the sounds of the night.
   The sea murmured without end. The sound of the large breakers rose and
fell. So did the wind in the bare branches. It rose and fell, becoming as quiet
as me, listening throughout the night. But the wind never left, it remained
with me. I could tell by the smell of the wet shingle and the subtle
trembling of the last leaf on the plane tree. I had noticed that stubborn grey
leaf the day before, but now, at night, it seemed a tiny living creature, my
one friend, keeping vigil beside me.
   Now and then gunshots echoed in the dark from somewhere off in the
city. After each shot, dogs barked for a long time. Once a faint light
flickered far out at sea and then vanished. Everything around me slept. I too
dozed off occasionally, but my sleep was fitful. It was the kind of half-sleep
when one can clearly see large white flowers floating on a dark sea or hear
the sound of a violin, soft as a child’s hand. In that half-sleep I felt
completely different from my usual self – extremely calm, trusting,
accepting of the world. From the darkness of the sea, I was certain I could
hear a woman whispering:

       So, what does my name mean to you?
       It’s certain to die like a mournful roar,
       Like waves splashing on a distant shore,
       A forest noise before the night is through.5


1 Dmitry Ovsyaniko-Kulikovsky (1853–1920), noted linguist, literary
scholar and member of the Russian Academy of Sciences.
2   Mishka Yaponchik (1881–1919, b. Moisei Volfovich Vinnitsky),
legendary Jewish gangster, revolutionary and Soviet military commander,
killed in the civil war.
3 Osip Runich (1889–1947, b. Osip Fradkin), early silent film star who
acted alongside Vera Kholodnaya. Runich left Russia after her death in
1919 for Europe and then Africa.
4 Vera Inber (1890–1972), poet and translator, especially remembered for
her diary of the Leningrad blockade.
5   Opening stanza of an untitled poem from 1830 by Pushkin.

                              OceanofPDF.com
88
The Last Shot



With each passing day, life in Odessa became more alarming. Soviet forces
had almost reached Voznesensk by now.
   Ships swarming with refugees were leaving for Constantinople. Almost
all these ships – dirty, rusty, black paint peeling from their sides – chugged
their way out of port low in the water, listing to one side, and belching thick
black smoke that blanketed all of Langeron and our Chernomorskaya Street.
But the newspapers still came out. The White authorities knew that the end
was no more than hours away, but they did everything in their power to hide
the fact from the civilians, especially the refugees from the north. The
papers carried telegrams stating that the Bolshevik advance had been
stopped and that French troops with artillery and poison gas were on their
way to Odessa from Thessaloniki.
   These rumours were spread to try to stop the crush of panicked refugees
fleeing to the south in the hope of reaching Constantinople, which would
hamper the White Army’s escape. Only a few ships were left in port, and
Denikin’s men were saving them for themselves. The officers, who had
long ago given up all hope, could be found at the Yellow Canary Café
reading stories in the papers that kept trying to convince everyone of the
hackneyed expression from the days of Napoleon’s invasion that ‘Moscow
has burned down, but Russia still stands’. The newspaper where I worked
kept rehashing this same theme in every last article, editorial and poem.
   One day Bunin dropped into our office. He was worried and wanted to
know what was happening at the front. He stood in the doorway, struggling
to take off the glove on his right hand. It was a cold, rainy day, and the wet
kid glove had stuck to his fingers. Finally, he pulled it off and, after
scanning our small, smoky room with his grey eyes, said: ‘No, not much of
a place you have here.’
   For some reason we felt put out.
   ‘What do you expect, Ivan Alexeevich?’ Nazarov replied. ‘We’ve already
got one foot in the grave.’
   ‘By the way,’ said Bunin, ‘you don’t happen to know where that
expression comes from, do you?’
   ‘No, I don’t.’
   ‘Oh well, anyway – you’re right. We’ve reached the end!’ he said and
then paused. ‘Rain, cold, darkness, but my heart’s at peace. Or rather, it’s
empty. Like death.’
   ‘Feeling low, Ivan Alexeevich?’ asked Nazarov cautiously.
   ‘No, not really,’ Bunin answered. ‘It’s just the world’s become such an
uncomfortable place. Even the sea smells of rusty iron.’ He got up and went
to our editor’s office.
   I had loved Bunin since a boy for his gloomy, merciless precision; for his
devotion to Russia, his incredible knowledge of its people, his profound
admiration of the world in all its diverse beauty, his vigilance; and for his
own clear, unmistakable understanding that happiness is everywhere, but
only for those who know it. Even then Bunin for me belonged to the
classics. I knew many of his poems by heart and sections of his prose as
well. My favourite work of his for its bitter suffering and unerring language
was ‘Elijah the Prophet’, a short story of no more than two or three pages.
Given all this, I was terror-struck and didn’t dare to so much as utter a word
in his presence. I lowered my head, listening to his monotone voice,
glancing up at him rarely, fearful of catching his eye.
   Many years later I read his Life of Arseniev. For me, some of its chapters
belong to the finest poetry and prose ever written, especially the passage
where Bunin writes about the bones of his mother, buried in the cold clay
earth of Yelets, about the inevitable loss of the people we love most, and
about the despair and loneliness all of us know in our hearts. He knew how
to use simple, painful words:

       A widow wept one night –
       She’d loved the baby tenderly, but it had died.
       The old neighbour wept too, pressing his sleeve to his eyes,
       The stars shone, and the kid wept in the sty.
       A mother wept in the night.
       Her night tears led another to cry.
       The stars fall like tears from the night sky,
       The Lord weeps, pressing his sleeve to his eyes.

   Bunin soon left. I could not work any longer, correcting the illiterate,
fabricated scribblings of the Odessa reporters, and so I went home to
Chernomorskaya Street.
   A black wind blew from the leaden sea. Sullen curtains of rain hung over
the water. The acacia leaves that had once floated on the clear puddles had
all drowned. Now they lay under the water, covering the pavement in thick,
yellow layers of rot. Only the wet ivy in the back gardens glistened,
offering proof of life. I walked towards the sea, down towards the Arcadia
district. The watery desert swirled and washed silently upon the smooth
sand. The vast, bleak gloom of the autumn sea flooded me with a diffuse
and cold sense of anguish, which I did not resist.
   How many times had I looked back upon my life? Now, going over it
year by year once again, I realised that nothing but the future could give
meaning, direction and justification to my disjointed and conflicted past.
Perhaps the future would sift from my life, from all that I had experienced,
everything touched by genuine human warmth and poetry and help me to
stitch these untidy fragments into a meaningful, coherent story. And who
knows, just maybe this story might answer some need in others as well and
not only in me, helping them through their own personal storm to a distant
patch of sunlight amid the dark clouds. I could see such a patch ahead of
me, slowly spreading over the sea to the south and promising to release the
pale autumn sun from its gloomy captivity.

                                      •

Overnight, the clouds dispersed, and in the morning I awoke to an
improbably blue sea outside my windows. A thin, sharp northeaster was
blowing, bringing with it as always cold, clear skies. The withered grass,
covered in shining, ringing hoar-frost, twisted in the wind. Slow, heavy surf
pounded the sea cliffs, leaving behind a white crust of ice. The wind tore
dollops of salt foam as thick as whipped egg whites from the tops of the
waves. Ragged mounds of it billowed and quivered on the beach, and it was
easy to believe the ancient Greeks that it had given birth to Aphrodite.
   My leisurely thoughts were interrupted by the thunder of artillery. It
slammed down on the city like a great iron paw. The whole sanatorium
shook and rattled, tiles fell from the roof, crashing into pieces on the
ground. This shot was followed by a second, then a third, and a fourth . . .
   A French battle cruiser anchored in the roadstead was firing into the
steppe. The shells flew over the city and exploded so far away that the
sound didn’t reach Odessa. Looking out of my window, I saw ‘Yasha on
Wheels’ race into the yard. He opened the stairway door and shouted at the
top of his lungs, his words echoing through the empty building: ‘The
Bolsheviks have broken through over by the Tiligul estuary. They’ve almost
reached Kuyalnik. It’s all over!’
   Kuyalnik was only a few kilometres east of Odessa.
   Yasha ran into my room. Nazarov followed. Yasha, still shouting, said
that the Whites had fled without firing a single shot. There was panic in the
port, the French cruiser was firing blindly into the steppe, and we had to
immediately throw a few essentials into a small bag and hurry to the port.
They had already started loading the steamers.
   ‘Well, okay then,’ I told him. ‘Go. It’s up to you and your conscience. As
for me, I cannot imagine giving up on my country, or my people, no matter
what.’
   ‘True,’ said Nazarov. ‘Life without Russia would be meaningless for me.
But Yasha, if your life is so precious, although I’m not sure to whom, run
along. To hell with you.’
   ‘Nonsense!’ Yasha muttered. He turned red and tears appeared in his
eyes. ‘It’s just that everybody’s fleeing. Maybe I just got carried away. You
know I’m not going anywhere.’
   There was little time to think. A moment of hesitation could save one’s
life or destroy it. Yasha ended up staying. He was visibly relieved not to
have to think about it anymore. He put on some water for tea. We drank a
quick cup and then headed off to Alexandrovsky Park. From the park’s old
pavilion on the edge of a cliff one had a clear view of the entire port and all
that was going on down there.
   For a long time after I could not shake the haunting impression that I had
already witnessed this epic flight in a painting by some pitiless artist: those
mouths, twisted in cries for help; eyes bulging from their sockets; green,
deeply etched faces gripped by the fear of death; the blind terror when
people can see only one thing – the rickety ship’s gangway with its
handrails snapping under the crush of human bodies; rifle butts crashing
down on heads; mothers holding up their crying babies in outstretched arms
over the crazed human herd; a woman trampled underfoot, still writhing
and screaming on the quay . . .
   People were literally destroying each other, preventing even those who
had reached the gangway and grabbed the railing from saving themselves. I
saw one lucky man take hold of the railing only to be immediately clutched
at by many hands. He inched his way forward, dragging these people along
with him up the gangway, but then lost his hold and fell together with the
others still clinging to his body into the sea. Unable to free himself from
this terrible human load, he went down into the water and disappeared.
   All the roads leading to the port were jammed with crowds of people.
The throngs seemed too big for the roads to handle, and it looked as though
the fences and houses might be crushed at any moment. That would have
helped to save lives, but the houses were all made of heavy stone and didn’t
give way. Instead, one heard the constant breaking of glass and splintering
of timber as people were squeezed through windows and doors.
   Crushed suitcases, bundles and baskets slithered downhill underfoot like
grotesque living creatures. Clothes were spilling out and winding
themselves around people’s feet. Women’s lace and nightgowns, children’s
frocks and ribbons trailed behind the fleeing mass, and the sight of these
homely things made their flight seem even more tragic. Cold clouds of dust
hung over the roads.
   Groups of officers and soldiers scattered and were lost in the crowds of
civilians, and only the felt cloaks of the men from the Caucasus stood out in
the crowd, swinging like black bells and making it difficult for them to run.
The men tore off their cloaks and threw them in the air, where they hung for
a moment, caught by the wind, as though gliding on their own like so many
flying carpets down to the port.
   A jet of steam spurted up into the murky sky over the bridge of one of the
steamers, followed by a heavy, shuddering whistle. Immediately taking up
the sound, all the other ships began whistling in various keys. This was the
chorus of departure. It sounded like a prayer for the dying, for those who
were departing their homeland and their people, leaving Russia’s fields and
woods, her springtimes and winters, renouncing their share in our common
suffering and joy, in our past and present, in the genius of Pushkin and
Tolstoy, and in that great filial love we all feel for our beautiful land.
   Soviet cavalry had by now made their way into the city. Several of the
horsemen had ridden out to the end of the breakwater, where they now sat
motionless on their horses. A minesweeper, convoying the ships, fired two
pointless rounds that exploded over the city with a thin crack. This was
their parting gift. The Soviet guns did not return fire.
   Silent crowds stood on the breakwaters, the boulevards and the bluffs
over the sea, watching the heavy hulks of the departing ships grow dim in
the smoke and dusk. The silence of the victors conveyed a painful reproach.
Before long, the ships disappeared in the mist. The winter wind was
blowing again from the north-east, as though turning over a new page. On it
was to be written a heroic story of Russia – long-suffering, unique and
beloved to our dying breath.

                            OceanofPDF.com
NOTE ON THE TRANSLATION

I first encountered The Story of a Life in the spring of 1982 in a bookstore
in Burlington, Vermont. I was a freshman at the university there and had
begun studying Russian the previous autumn. Prior to that I had not read a
single Russian author and knew almost nothing about the country, but my
language studies had introduced me to a fascinating world that I was eager
to discover.
   For some reason I don’t recall, the book caught my eye, and after reading
the impressive endorsements on the back cover, I decided to give it a try.
From the opening lines, I was enthralled. If most readers fall in love with
Russia by way of Dostoevsky or Tolstoy or Chekhov, for me it was
Paustovsky. I inhaled the book in a few days and started pressing my copy
on everyone I knew, insisting with all the fervour of a proselyte that they
read it. A year or so later I put the book into the hands of an acquaintance,
who then lent it to a friend. I never saw the book again.
   Decades passed and I found myself one day walking through Moscow’s
Kuzminki Park. I came upon a wooden blue-grey house tucked in a growth
of trees off the main allée. Curious, I approached and was surprised to see it
was a museum to Paustovsky. I went inside and found myself transported
back to 1982 and my discovery of him and his work. Now able to read The
Story of a Life in the original, I bought a copy and experienced a similar
sensation of amazement, although deepened by the knowledge of the
language, people and their history gained over the years.
   After some research, I learned that The Story of a Life had long been out
of print in English and contemplated coordinating the publication of a new
edition. First, however, I decided to compare the Russian text against the
existing translations. I had read Joseph Barnes’s translation published by
Pantheon Books in New York in the spring of 1964 and reissued in
paperback in 1982.1 Reading Barnes’s rendering again I recalled my initial
amazement at Paustovsky’s work, but was disappointed by how flat-footed,
awkward and frustratingly literal the translation was. Nearly every page
contained an error or two and it was obvious that in many instances Barnes
had misunderstood the Russian original and ended up producing sentences
that either were wrong or distorted Paustovsky’s meaning. And Barnes had
nearly always ignored the many instances of verse quoted by Paustovsky
and left them out of his translation.2
   A few months after the American publication in 1964, Harvill Press in
London published The Story of a Life: Childhood and Schooldays, the first
volume of Paustovsky’s hexalogy, in a translation by Manya Harari and
Michael Duncan. Harari, the translator (with Max Hayward) of Pasternak’s
Doctor Zhivago, as well as works by Ilya Ehrenburg and Yevgenia
Ginzburg, was a co-founder of Harvill. Together with Duncan and then
Andrew Thomson, Harari translated the next three volumes – Slow
Approach of Thunder (1965), In that Dawn (1967) and Years of Hope
(1968). After Harari fell ill in 1967 with the cancer that would take her life,
Harvill commissioned Kyril Fitzlyon to translate the final volumes,
published as Southern Adventure (1969) and The Restless Years (1974).
   The Harvill translations are superior to Barnes’s work, but they are not
without fault. Like his translation, the first three volumes were done when
Paustovsky was still alive and there was the hope that he might win the
Nobel Prize. Speed was of the essence, and in the rush to complete the
translations as quickly as possible, a great many errors and omissions made
their way into the Harvill publications as well.
   Clauses, sentences, paragraphs and even an entire chapter – ‘Here Lives
Nobody’ in volume two – have been omitted. Names are incorrectly
rendered (an Ivanov becomes a Karavaev in the chapter ‘Artillerymen’),
animals change species (‘clouds of fry’ become ‘a flock of water birds’ in
‘The Zone of Silence’), places are muddled (Kobrin becomes Brest in
‘Treason’), numbers get scrambled (the consumptive Glasha loses eight
years of her life and is made seventeen instead of twenty-five in ‘The
Suburb of Chechelevka’). Errors like these appear throughout.
   One also notices in the Harvill translations a tendency to tone down the
emotional colour of Paustovsky’s prose, as if the translators feared his
intensity and range of feeling might be a bit much for British sensibilities.
Perhaps out of a concern not to offend against good taste, certain elements,
such as Pan Kturenda’s gonorrhoea in ‘The Violet Ray’, are silently
omitted.
   It became obvious that a new, improved translation was warranted.
Initially, I planned to do an abridged translation of all six volumes,
something that has been done before with other massive works, such as
Alexander Herzen’s My Past and Thoughts and Alexander Solzhenitsyn’s
Gulag Archipelago.3 But I decided against this for two reasons. First, I
found it impossible to decide which sections or chapters could be deleted
without denying the reader the pleasure they afforded or without needing to
add extensive notes and commentary to fill in the gaps caused by these
redactions. Inserting my voice alongside Paustovsky’s would only diminish
the text. Second, after examining the publication history of The Story of a
Life, it became clear that volumes five and six had been thoroughly
bowdlerised by Paustovsky’s Soviet editors and never did appear in print as
he had wished. Any future translation of the final volumes should be
undertaken only after a complete study of Paustovsky’s manuscripts held in
the Russian State Archive of Literature and Art in Moscow.
   Paustovsky conceived of each volume of his memoirs as a discrete work
and so excluding the final three volumes in no way violates the author’s
intentions. Moreover, as has been noted before, the first three volumes form
a clear trilogy that follow Paustovsky’s life from childhood through the
revolution and civil war, ending with the Soviet victory, while the second
trilogy is set in the early years of the newly formed Soviet state.4
   Paustovsky revised his memoir throughout his life, and it has been
published in Russia many times over the past fifty years in various editions.
This translation is based on the latest and most authoritative text of The
Story of a Life, published by TERRA in Moscow in 2017.5

                                      •

The names of the streets, villages, towns, cities and even countries
mentioned in The Story of a Life have in many instances changed from the
time when Paustovsky lived and wrote. The multinational empire
Paustovsky was born and grew up in collapsed in 1917. It was then
reconfigured in the early 1920s, only to collapse again in the 1990s. The
successive waves of political and social upheaval brought with them
linguistic changes as well. This poses challenges for the translator. What,
for example, is one to do with a street that has had four different names?
Paustovsky writes about Kiev’s Bibikovsky Boulevard, as it was called
from 1869 to 1919, but before that it was known as Bulvarnaya Street from
1834 to 1850 and Shosseiny Boulevard from 1850 to 1869, and was only
given its present name, Taras Shevchenko Boulevard, in 1919. Kiev is now
Kyiv, Gorodishche is now Horodyshche, Yekaterinoslav is now Dnipro. The
list goes on and on.
   Instead of updating geographical place names to reflect current usage, I
have chosen to use the ones Paustovsky gives in his memoir. Although this
may offend some readers, my decision to stick with the Russian names is
not in any way intended as a slight; rather it is driven by the desire to best
capture the author’s voice, which, after all, is a Russian one, and to most
accurately reflect the world he so evocatively describes in his work.
   Paustovsky would have been the first to acknowledge that Ukrainians,
Belorussians and Poles had different names for the places he wrote about,
and his choices were in no way intended as signifiers of some insistent
Russian nationalism; they simply express his own personal lived
experience. Readers curious to know the current spelling of locations
mentioned in the text should consult the appended ‘Guide to Place Names’.
   In transliterating the Russian, I have used a modified Library of Congress
system, ignoring hard and soft signs and simplifying most endings (e.g., –
sky, not –skii). The letter ë signifies an iotated o that sounds like the yo in
‘your’.
   All notes and translations, including song lyrics and verse, are my own,
except for the line from Igor Severyanin’s ‘Trait upon Trait’ in Restless
Youth, which was generously provided by Boris Dralyuk.

                                       •

The help of many friends, colleagues and institutions made this translation
possible. It is a pleasure to thank Paustovsky’s step-daughter Galina
Arbuzova, Valentina Pimneva, Angelika Dormidontova, Irina Pakhomova,
Dmitry Bak, Alexei Nevsky, Alexander Bobosov, Anya Babenko, Nikita
Sokolov, Tatyana Safronova, Helen Rappaport, Joshua Yaffa, Andrew
Solomon, Shaun Whiteside, Peter Pozefsky, Wolfgang Mieder, Ronald
Vroon, Hilde Hoogenboom and Andrew Kahn. I owe a special thanks to
Boris Dralyuk, who has been a constant source of encouragement and help
throughout this project. Mariana Markova provided considerable help in
researching Paustovsky’s biography. The support of the University of
Washington’s Ellison Center for Russian, East European, and Central Asian
studies and the university’s Suzzallo and Allen Libraries proved invaluable.
In Russia, I am grateful to have had the assistance of the K. G. Paustov sky
Museum, the state Literary Museum, the Russian state Archive of Literature
and Art and the K. G. Paustovsky Memorial House-Museum in Tarusa.
   My literary agent, Melissa Chinchillo, and the diligent staff at Fletcher
and Company tracked down the English language rights to Paustovsky’s
works and skilfully negotiated the publication of this new translation. At
Vintage Classics UK, I thank Frances Macmillan and Nicholas Skidmore.
Jonathan Wadman did a masterful job copy-editing the text, as did Anthony
Hippisley with the proofread. My work was funded in part by a generous
fellowship from the John Simon Guggenheim Memorial Foundation.
   As always, my greatest debt is to my family – Stephanie, Emma and
Andrew. I wish to dedicate this translation to them in the hope they might
experience some of the joy Paustovsky’s masterpiece has provided me.

                                                          —Douglas Smith


1 Barnes’s publication comprises only the first three volumes of
Paustovsky’s Story.
2 See the thorough discussion in Munir Sendich, ‘Problems of Literary
Translations: Inaccuracies in Rendering from Russian – Joseph Barnes’
Translation The Story of a Life of Konstantin Paustovsky’s Povest’ o
zhizni’, Russian Language Journal/Russkii iazyk, 25:91 (1971), 21–40.
Similar complaints were made by Helen Muchnic in her review for the New
York Review of Books, ‘A Russian Soul’, 20 Aug. 1968. Nevertheless,
Barnes was awarded the PEN/ Book-of-the-Month Club Translation Prize
in 1965.
3 Alexander Herzen, My Past and Thoughts: The Memoirs of Alexander
Herzen, translated by Constance Garnett, revised by Humphrey Higgins,
abridged by Dwight Macdonald, introduction by Isaiah Berlin (New York:
Alfred A. Knopf, 1973); Aleksandr I. Solzhenitsyn, The Gulag Archipelago
1918–1956: An Experiment in Literary Investigation, translated by Thomas
P. Whitney and Harry Willetts, abridged by Edward E. Ericson Jr (New
York: Harper & Row, 1985).
4 Author’s note, Novyi mir, 3 (1955), 3; Konstantin Paustovskii, Povest’ o
zhizni (Moscow: TERRA, 2017), 1:551–2.
5   Paustovskii, Povest’ o zhizni, 1:554.

                                OceanofPDF.com
GUIDE TO PLACE NAMES
Alma-Ata – Almaty, Kazakhstan

Bakhchisarai – Bakhchysarai, Ukraine
Baranovichi – Baranavichy, Belarus
Belaya Tserkov – Bila Tserkva, Ukraine
Belorussia – Belarus
Belovezha Forest – Białowiez˙a Forest, Poland
Bobrinets – Bobrynets, Ukraine
Borshchagovka – Borshchahivka, Ukraine
Brest-Litovsk – Brest, Belarus

Chechelevka – Chechelivka, Ukraine
Chenstokhov – Cze˛stochowa, Poland
Cherkassy – Cherkasy, Ukraine
Chernigov – Chernihiv, Ukraine
Chernobyl – Chornobyl, Ukraine
Constantinople – Istanbul, Turkey

Darnitsa – Darnytsya, Ukraine
Dembitsa – De˛bica, Poland
Demievka – Demiyivka, Ukraine
Dorpat – Tartu, Estonia

Fastov – Fastiv, Ukraine

Glubochitsa – Hlubochytsia, Ukraine
Golta – Pervomaysk, Ukraine
Gorodishche – Horodyshche, Ukraine
Grodno – Hrodna, Belarus
Gulyaipole – Hulyaipole, Ukraine

Irpen – Irpin, Ukraine
Ivangorod – De˛blin, Poland

Kanev – Kaniv, Ukraine
Keltse – Kielce, Poland
Kharkov – Kharkiv, Ukraine
Khentsiny – Che˛ciny, Poland
Khristinovka – Khrystynivka, Ukraine
Kiev – Kyiv, Ukraine
Kishinëv – Chişinău, Moldova
Kobrin – Kobryn, Belarus
Kremenchug – Kremenchuk, Ukraine
Kreshchatik – Khreschatyk, Kyiv, Ukraine
Kuyalnik – Kuyalnyk, Ukraine

Lodz – Łódź, Poland
Loev – Loyeŭ, Belarus
Lipki – Lypky, Ukraine
Lugansk – Luhansk, Ukraine
Lvov – Lviv, Ukraine
Lyubartov – Lubartów, Poland

Melets – Mielec, Poland
Mirgorod – Myrhorod, Ukraine
Mogilëv – Mahilioŭ, Belarus
Molodechno – Maladzyechna, Belarus
Mukden – Shenyang, China

Nesvizh – Nyasvizh, Belarus

Odessa – Odesa, Ukraine

Peking – Beijing, China
Petrograd – St Petersburg, Russia
Pilipchi – Pylypcha, Ukraine
Pishchats – Pisczcac, Poland
Plevna – Pleven, Bulgaria
Pochaev – Pochayiv, Ukraine
Podol – Podil, Ukraine
Pomoshnaya – Pomichna, Ukraine
Port Arthur – Lüshunkou, China
Priluki – Pryluky, Ukraine
Pshemysl – Przemyśl, Poland

Rybnitsa – Rîbniṭa, Moldova

Sedltse – Siedlce, Poland
Siam – Thailand
Simbirsk – Ulyanovsk, Russia
Skarzhisko – Skarz˙ysko-Kamienna, Poland
Smela – Smila, Ukraine
Solomenka – Solomyanka, Ukraine
Svyatoshino – Svyatoshyn, Ukraine

Tiflis – Tbilisi, Georgia
Trebizond – Trabzon, Turkey
Tripolie – Trypillya, Ukraine
Tsaritsyn – Volgograd, Russia
Tyasmin (river) – Tyasmyn, Ukraine

Uralsk – Oral, Kazakhstan

Vasilkov – Vasylkiv, Ukraine
Vepsh (river) – Wieprz, Poland
Vinnitsa – Vynnitsya, Ukraine
Vitebsk – Vitsebsk, Belarus
Voditsa – Vodytsya, Ukraine
Vyatka – Kirov, Russia
Vyshnitsa – Vyzhnytsia, Ukraine

Yasinovataya – Yasynuvata, Ukraine
Yekaterinoslav – Dnipro, Ukraine
Yuzovka – Donetsk, Ukraine

Zamirie – Haradzeya, Belarus
Zhitomir – Zhytomyr, Ukraine
Zhmerinka – Zhmerynka, Ukraine
Zlatopol – Zlatopil, Ukraine
Znamenka – Znamyanka, Ukraine

                         OceanofPDF.com
